“That is all very proper and civil, I am sure,” said Mrs. Bennet, “andI dare say she is a very agreeable woman. It is a pity that great ladiesin general are not more like her. Does she live near you, sir?”“The garden in which stands my humble abode is separated only by a lanefrom Rosings Park, her ladyship’s residence.”“I think you said she was a widow, sir? Has she any family?”“She has only one daughter, the heiress of Rosings, and of veryextensive property.”“Ah!” said Mrs. Bennet, shaking her head, “then she is better off thanmany girls. And what sort of young lady is she? Is she handsome?”“She is a most charming young lady indeed. Lady Catherine herself saysthat, in point of true beauty, Miss de Bourgh is far superior to thehandsomest of her sex, because there is that in her features which marksthe young lady of distinguished birth. She is unfortunately of a sicklyconstitution, which has prevented her from making that progress in manyaccomplishments which she could not have otherwise failed of, as I aminformed by the lady who superintended her education, and who stillresides with them. But she is perfectly amiable, and often condescendsto drive by my humble abode in her little phaeton and ponies.”“Has she been presented? I do not remember her name among the ladies atcourt.”“Her indifferent state of health unhappily prevents her being in town;and by that means, as I told Lady Catherine one day, has deprived theBritish court of its brightest ornament. Her ladyship seemed pleasedwith the idea; and you may imagine that I am happy on every occasion tooffer those little delicate compliments which are always acceptableto ladies. I have more than once observed to Lady Catherine, thather charming daughter seemed born to be a duchess, and that the mostelevated rank, instead of giving her consequence, would be adorned byher. These are the kind of little things which please her ladyship, andit is a sort of attention which I conceive myself peculiarly bound topay.”“You judge very properly,” said Mr. Bennet, “and it is happy for youthat you possess the talent of flattering with delicacy. May I askwhether these pleasing attentions proceed from the impulse of themoment, or are the result of previous study?”“They arise chiefly from what is passing at the time, and though Isometimes amuse myself with suggesting and arranging such little elegantcompliments as may be adapted to ordinary occasions, I always wish togive them as unstudied an air as possible.”Mr. Bennet’s expectations were fully answered. His cousin was as absurdas he had hoped, and he listened to him with the keenest enjoyment,maintaining at the same time the most resolute composure of countenance,and, except in an occasional glance at Elizabeth, requiring no partnerin his pleasure.By tea-time, however, the dose had been enough, and Mr. Bennet was gladto take his guest into the drawing-room again, and, when tea was over,glad to invite him to read aloud to the ladies. Mr. Collins readilyassented, and a book was produced; but, on beholding it (for everythingannounced it to be from a circulating library), he started back, andbegging pardon, protested that he never read novels. Kitty stared athim, and Lydia exclaimed. Other books were produced, and after somedeliberation he chose Fordyce’s Sermons. Lydia gaped as he opened thevolume, and before he had, with very monotonous solemnity, read threepages, she interrupted him with:“Do you know, mamma, that my uncle Phillips talks of turning awayRichard; and if he does, Colonel Forster will hire him. My aunt told meso herself on Saturday. I shall walk to Meryton to-morrow to hear moreabout it, and to ask when Mr. Denny comes back from town.”Lydia was bid by her two eldest sisters to hold her tongue; but Mr.Collins, much offended, laid aside his book, and said:“I have often observed how little young ladies are interested by booksof a serious stamp, though written solely for their benefit. It amazesme, I confess; for, certainly, there can be nothing so advantageous tothem as instruction. But I will no longer importune my young cousin.”Then turning to Mr. Bennet, he offered himself as his antagonist atbackgammon. Mr. Bennet accepted the challenge, observing that he actedvery wisely in leaving the girls to their own trifling amusements.Mrs. Bennet and her daughters apologised most civilly for Lydia’sinterruption, and promised that it should not occur again, if he wouldresume his book; but Mr. Collins, after assuring them that he bore hisyoung cousin no ill-will, and should never resent her behaviour as anyaffront, seated himself at another table with Mr. Bennet, and preparedfor backgammon.Chapter 15Mr. Collins was not a sensible man, and the deficiency of nature hadbeen but little assisted by education or society; the greatest partof his life having been spent under the guidance of an illiterate andmiserly father; and though he belonged to one of the universities, hehad merely kept the necessary terms, without forming at it any usefulacquaintance. The subjection in which his father had brought him up hadgiven him originally great humility of manner; but it was now agood deal counteracted by the self-conceit of a weak head, living inretirement, and the consequential feelings of early and unexpectedprosperity. A fortunate chance had recommended him to Lady Catherine deBourgh when the living of Hunsford was vacant; and the respect whichhe felt for her high rank, and his veneration for her as his patroness,mingling with a very good opinion of himself, of his authority as aclergyman, and his right as a rector, made him altogether a mixture ofpride and obsequiousness, self-importance and humility.Having now a good house and a very sufficient income, he intended tomarry; and in seeking a reconciliation with the Longbourn family he hada wife in view, as he meant to choose one of the daughters, if he foundthem as handsome and amiable as they were represented by common report.This was his plan of amends--of atonement--for inheriting their father’sestate; and he thought it an excellent one, full of eligibility andsuitableness, and excessively generous and disinterested on his ownpart.His plan did not vary on seeing them. Miss Bennet’s lovely faceconfirmed his views, and established all his strictest notions of whatwas due to seniority; and for the first evening _she_ was his settledchoice. The next morning, however, made an alteration; for in aquarter of an hour’s tete-a-tete with Mrs. Bennet before breakfast, aconversation beginning with his parsonage-house, and leading naturallyto the avowal of his hopes, that a mistress might be found for it atLongbourn, produced from her, amid very complaisant smiles and generalencouragement, a caution against the very Jane he had fixed on. “As toher _younger_ daughters, she could not take upon her to say--she couldnot positively answer--but she did not _know_ of any prepossession; her_eldest_ daughter, she must just mention--she felt it incumbent on herto hint, was likely to be very soon engaged.”Mr. Collins had only to change from Jane to Elizabeth--and it was soondone--done while Mrs. Bennet was stirring the fire. Elizabeth, equallynext to Jane in birth and beauty, succeeded her of course.Mrs. Bennet treasured up the hint, and trusted that she might soon havetwo daughters married; and the man whom she could not bear to speak ofthe day before was now high in her good graces.Lydia’s intention of walking to Meryton was not forgotten; every sisterexcept Mary agreed to go with her; and Mr. Collins was to attend them,at the request of Mr. Bennet, who was most anxious to get rid of him,and have his library to himself; for thither Mr. Collins had followedhim after breakfast; and there he would continue, nominally engaged withone of the largest folios in the collection, but really talking to Mr.Bennet, with little cessation, of his house and garden at Hunsford. Suchdoings discomposed Mr. Bennet exceedingly. In his library he had beenalways sure of leisure and tranquillity; and though prepared, as he toldElizabeth, to meet with folly and conceit in every other room of thehouse, he was used to be free from them there; his civility, therefore,was most prompt in inviting Mr. Collins to join his daughters in theirwalk; and Mr. Collins, being in fact much better fitted for a walkerthan a reader, was extremely pleased to close his large book, and go.In pompous nothings on his side, and civil assents on that of hiscousins, their time passed till they entered Meryton. The attention ofthe younger ones was then no longer to be gained by him. Their eyes wereimmediately wandering up in the street in quest of the officers, andnothing less than a very smart bonnet indeed, or a really new muslin ina shop window, could recall them.But the attention of every lady was soon caught by a young man, whomthey had never seen before, of most gentlemanlike appearance, walkingwith another officer on the other side of the way. The officer wasthe very Mr. Denny concerning whose return from London Lydia cameto inquire, and he bowed as they passed. All were struck with thestranger’s air, all wondered who he could be; and Kitty and Lydia,determined if possible to find out, led the way across the street, underpretense of wanting something in an opposite shop, and fortunatelyhad just gained the pavement when the two gentlemen, turning back, hadreached the same spot. Mr. Denny addressed them directly, and entreatedpermission to introduce his friend, Mr. Wickham, who had returned withhim the day before from town, and he was happy to say had accepted acommission in their corps. This was exactly as it should be; for theyoung man wanted only regimentals to make him completely charming.His appearance was greatly in his favour; he had all the best part ofbeauty, a fine countenance, a good figure, and very pleasing address.The introduction was followed up on his side by a happy readinessof conversation--a readiness at the same time perfectly correct andunassuming; and the whole party were still standing and talking togethervery agreeably, when the sound of horses drew their notice, and Darcyand Bingley were seen riding down the street. On distinguishing theladies of the group, the two gentlemen came directly towards them, andbegan the usual civilities. Bingley was the principal spokesman, andMiss Bennet the principal object. He was then, he said, on his way toLongbourn on purpose to inquire after her. Mr. Darcy corroboratedit with a bow, and was beginning to determine not to fix his eyeson Elizabeth, when they were suddenly arrested by the sight of thestranger, and Elizabeth happening to see the countenance of both as theylooked at each other, was all astonishment at the effect of the meeting.Both changed colour, one looked white, the other red. Mr. Wickham,after a few moments, touched his hat--a salutation which Mr. Darcy justdeigned to return. What could be the meaning of it? It was impossible toimagine; it was impossible not to long to know.In another minute, Mr. Bingley, but without seeming to have noticed whatpassed, took leave and rode on with his friend.Mr. Denny and Mr. Wickham walked with the young ladies to the door ofMr. Phillip’s house, and then made their bows, in spite of Miss Lydia’spressing entreaties that they should come in, and even in spite ofMrs. Phillips’s throwing up the parlour window and loudly seconding theinvitation.Mrs. Phillips was always glad to see her nieces; and the two eldest,from their recent absence, were particularly welcome, and she waseagerly expressing her surprise at their sudden return home, which, astheir own carriage had not fetched them, she should have known nothingabout, if she had not happened to see Mr. Jones’s shop-boy in thestreet, who had told her that they were not to send any more draughts toNetherfield because the Miss Bennets were come away, when her civilitywas claimed towards Mr. Collins by Jane’s introduction of him. Shereceived him with her very best politeness, which he returned withas much more, apologising for his intrusion, without any previousacquaintance with her, which he could not help flattering himself,however, might be justified by his relationship to the young ladies whointroduced him to her notice. Mrs. Phillips was quite awed by such anexcess of good breeding; but her contemplation of one stranger was soonput to an end by exclamations and inquiries about the other; of whom,however, she could only tell her nieces what they already knew, thatMr. Denny had brought him from London, and that he was to have alieutenant’s commission in the ----shire. She had been watching him thelast hour, she said, as he walked up and down the street, and had Mr.Wickham appeared, Kitty and Lydia would certainly have continued theoccupation, but unluckily no one passed windows now except a few of theofficers, who, in comparison with the stranger, were become “stupid,disagreeable fellows.” Some of them were to dine with the Phillipsesthe next day, and their aunt promised to make her husband call on Mr.Wickham, and give him an invitation also, if the family from Longbournwould come in the evening. This was agreed to, and Mrs. Phillipsprotested that they would have a nice comfortable noisy game of lotterytickets, and a little bit of hot supper afterwards. The prospect of suchdelights was very cheering, and they parted in mutual good spirits. Mr.Collins repeated his apologies in quitting the room, and was assuredwith unwearying civility that they were perfectly needless.As they walked home, Elizabeth related to Jane what she had seen passbetween the two gentlemen; but though Jane would have defended eitheror both, had they appeared to be in the wrong, she could no more explainsuch behaviour than her sister.Mr. Collins on his return highly gratified Mrs. Bennet by admiringMrs. Phillips’s manners and politeness. He protested that, except LadyCatherine and her daughter, he had never seen a more elegant woman;for she had not only received him with the utmost civility, but evenpointedly included him in her invitation for the next evening, althoughutterly unknown to her before. Something, he supposed, might beattributed to his connection with them, but yet he had never met with somuch attention in the whole course of his life.Chapter 16As no objection was made to the young people’s engagement with theiraunt, and all Mr. Collins’s scruples of leaving Mr. and Mrs. Bennet fora single evening during his visit were most steadily resisted, the coachconveyed him and his five cousins at a suitable hour to Meryton; andthe girls had the pleasure of hearing, as they entered the drawing-room,that Mr. Wickham had accepted their uncle’s invitation, and was then inthe house.When this information was given, and they had all taken their seats, Mr.Collins was at leisure to look around him and admire, and he was so muchstruck with the size and furniture of the apartment, that he declared hemight almost have supposed himself in the small summer breakfastparlour at Rosings; a comparison that did not at first convey muchgratification; but when Mrs. Phillips understood from him whatRosings was, and who was its proprietor--when she had listened to thedescription of only one of Lady Catherine’s drawing-rooms, and foundthat the chimney-piece alone had cost eight hundred pounds, she felt allthe force of the compliment, and would hardly have resented a comparisonwith the housekeeper’s room.In describing to her all the grandeur of Lady Catherine and her mansion,with occasional digressions in praise of his own humble abode, andthe improvements it was receiving, he was happily employed until thegentlemen joined them; and he found in Mrs. Phillips a very attentivelistener, whose opinion of his consequence increased with what sheheard, and who was resolving to retail it all among her neighbours assoon as she could. To the girls, who could not listen to their cousin,and who had nothing to do but to wish for an instrument, and examinetheir own indifferent imitations of china on the mantelpiece, theinterval of waiting appeared very long. It was over at last, however.The gentlemen did approach, and when Mr. Wickham walked into the room,Elizabeth felt that she had neither been seeing him before, nor thinkingof him since, with the smallest degree of unreasonable admiration.The officers of the ----shire were in general a very creditable,gentlemanlike set, and the best of them were of the present party; butMr. Wickham was as far beyond them all in person, countenance, air, andwalk, as _they_ were superior to the broad-faced, stuffy uncle Phillips,breathing port wine, who followed them into the room.Mr. Wickham was the happy man towards whom almost every female eye wasturned, and Elizabeth was the happy woman by whom he finally seatedhimself; and the agreeable manner in which he immediately fell intoconversation, though it was only on its being a wet night, made her feelthat the commonest, dullest, most threadbare topic might be renderedinteresting by the skill of the speaker.With such rivals for the notice of the fair as Mr. Wickham and theofficers, Mr. Collins seemed to sink into insignificance; to the youngladies he certainly was nothing; but he had still at intervals a kindlistener in Mrs. Phillips, and was by her watchfulness, most abundantlysupplied with coffee and muffin. When the card-tables were placed, hehad the opportunity of obliging her in turn, by sitting down to whist.“I know little of the game at present,” said he, “but I shall be gladto improve myself, for in my situation in life--” Mrs. Phillips was veryglad for his compliance, but could not wait for his reason.Mr. Wickham did not play at whist, and with ready delight was hereceived at the other table between Elizabeth and Lydia. At first thereseemed danger of Lydia’s engrossing him entirely, for she was a mostdetermined talker; but being likewise extremely fond of lottery tickets,she soon grew too much interested in the game, too eager in making betsand exclaiming after prizes to have attention for anyone in particular.Allowing for the common demands of the game, Mr. Wickham was thereforeat leisure to talk to Elizabeth, and she was very willing to hearhim, though what she chiefly wished to hear she could not hope to betold--the history of his acquaintance with Mr. Darcy. She dared noteven mention that gentleman. Her curiosity, however, was unexpectedlyrelieved. Mr. Wickham began the subject himself. He inquired how farNetherfield was from Meryton; and, after receiving her answer, asked ina hesitating manner how long Mr. Darcy had been staying there.“About a month,” said Elizabeth; and then, unwilling to let the subjectdrop, added, “He is a man of very large property in Derbyshire, Iunderstand.”“Yes,” replied Mr. Wickham; “his estate there is a noble one. A clearten thousand per annum. You could not have met with a person morecapable of giving you certain information on that head than myself, forI have been connected with his family in a particular manner from myinfancy.”Elizabeth could not but look surprised.“You may well be surprised, Miss Bennet, at such an assertion, afterseeing, as you probably might, the very cold manner of our meetingyesterday. Are you much acquainted with Mr. Darcy?”“As much as I ever wish to be,” cried Elizabeth very warmly. “I havespent four days in the same house with him, and I think him verydisagreeable.”“I have no right to give _my_ opinion,” said Wickham, “as to his beingagreeable or otherwise. I am not qualified to form one. I have known himtoo long and too well to be a fair judge. It is impossible for _me_to be impartial. But I believe your opinion of him would in generalastonish--and perhaps you would not express it quite so stronglyanywhere else. Here you are in your own family.”“Upon my word, I say no more _here_ than I might say in any house inthe neighbourhood, except Netherfield. He is not at all liked inHertfordshire. Everybody is disgusted with his pride. You will not findhim more favourably spoken of by anyone.”“I cannot pretend to be sorry,” said Wickham, after a shortinterruption, “that he or that any man should not be estimated beyondtheir deserts; but with _him_ I believe it does not often happen. Theworld is blinded by his fortune and consequence, or frightened by hishigh and imposing manners, and sees him only as he chooses to be seen.”“I should take him, even on _my_ slight acquaintance, to be anill-tempered man.” Wickham only shook his head.“I wonder,” said he, at the next opportunity of speaking, “whether he islikely to be in this country much longer.”“I do not at all know; but I _heard_ nothing of his going away when Iwas at Netherfield. I hope your plans in favour of the ----shire willnot be affected by his being in the neighbourhood.”“Oh! no--it is not for _me_ to be driven away by Mr. Darcy. If _he_wishes to avoid seeing _me_, he must go. We are not on friendly terms,and it always gives me pain to meet him, but I have no reason foravoiding _him_ but what I might proclaim before all the world, a senseof very great ill-usage, and most painful regrets at his being what heis. His father, Miss Bennet, the late Mr. Darcy, was one of the best menthat ever breathed, and the truest friend I ever had; and I can neverbe in company with this Mr. Darcy without being grieved to the soul bya thousand tender recollections. His behaviour to myself has beenscandalous; but I verily believe I could forgive him anything andeverything, rather than his disappointing the hopes and disgracing thememory of his father.”Elizabeth found the interest of the subject increase, and listened withall her heart; but the delicacy of it prevented further inquiry.Mr. Wickham began to speak on more general topics, Meryton, theneighbourhood, the society, appearing highly pleased with all thathe had yet seen, and speaking of the latter with gentle but veryintelligible gallantry.“It was the prospect of constant society, and good society,” he added,“which was my chief inducement to enter the ----shire. I knew it to bea most respectable, agreeable corps, and my friend Denny tempted mefurther by his account of their present quarters, and the very greatattentions and excellent acquaintances Meryton had procured them.Society, I own, is necessary to me. I have been a disappointed man, andmy spirits will not bear solitude. I _must_ have employment and society.A military life is not what I was intended for, but circumstances havenow made it eligible. The church _ought_ to have been my profession--Iwas brought up for the church, and I should at this time have been inpossession of a most valuable living, had it pleased the gentleman wewere speaking of just now.”“Indeed!”“Yes--the late Mr. Darcy bequeathed me the next presentation of the bestliving in his gift. He was my godfather, and excessively attached to me.I cannot do justice to his kindness. He meant to provide for me amply,and thought he had done it; but when the living fell, it was givenelsewhere.”“Good heavens!” cried Elizabeth; “but how could _that_ be? How could hiswill be disregarded? Why did you not seek legal redress?”“There was just such an informality in the terms of the bequest as togive me no hope from law. A man of honour could not have doubted theintention, but Mr. Darcy chose to doubt it--or to treat it as a merelyconditional recommendation, and to assert that I had forfeited all claimto it by extravagance, imprudence--in short anything or nothing. Certainit is, that the living became vacant two years ago, exactly as I wasof an age to hold it, and that it was given to another man; and noless certain is it, that I cannot accuse myself of having really doneanything to deserve to lose it. I have a warm, unguarded temper, andI may have spoken my opinion _of_ him, and _to_ him, too freely. I canrecall nothing worse. But the fact is, that we are very different sortof men, and that he hates me.”“This is quite shocking! He deserves to be publicly disgraced.”“Some time or other he _will_ be--but it shall not be by _me_. Till Ican forget his father, I can never defy or expose _him_.”Elizabeth honoured him for such feelings, and thought him handsomer thanever as he expressed them.“But what,” said she, after a pause, “can have been his motive? What canhave induced him to behave so cruelly?”“A thorough, determined dislike of me--a dislike which I cannot butattribute in some measure to jealousy. Had the late Mr. Darcy liked meless, his son might have borne with me better; but his father’s uncommonattachment to me irritated him, I believe, very early in life. He hadnot a temper to bear the sort of competition in which we stood--the sortof preference which was often given me.”“I had not thought Mr. Darcy so bad as this--though I have never likedhim. I had not thought so very ill of him. I had supposed him to bedespising his fellow-creatures in general, but did not suspect him ofdescending to such malicious revenge, such injustice, such inhumanity asthis.”After a few minutes’ reflection, however, she continued, “I _do_remember his boasting one day, at Netherfield, of the implacability ofhis resentments, of his having an unforgiving temper. His dispositionmust be dreadful.”“I will not trust myself on the subject,” replied Wickham; “I can hardlybe just to him.”Elizabeth was again deep in thought, and after a time exclaimed, “Totreat in such a manner the godson, the friend, the favourite of hisfather!” She could have added, “A young man, too, like _you_, whose verycountenance may vouch for your being amiable”--but she contented herselfwith, “and one, too, who had probably been his companion from childhood,connected together, as I think you said, in the closest manner!”“We were born in the same parish, within the same park; the greatestpart of our youth was passed together; inmates of the same house,sharing the same amusements, objects of the same parental care. _My_father began life in the profession which your uncle, Mr. Phillips,appears to do so much credit to--but he gave up everything to be ofuse to the late Mr. Darcy and devoted all his time to the care of thePemberley property. He was most highly esteemed by Mr. Darcy, a mostintimate, confidential friend. Mr. Darcy often acknowledged himself tobe under the greatest obligations to my father’s active superintendence,and when, immediately before my father’s death, Mr. Darcy gave him avoluntary promise of providing for me, I am convinced that he felt it tobe as much a debt of gratitude to _him_, as of his affection to myself.”“How strange!” cried Elizabeth. “How abominable! I wonder that the verypride of this Mr. Darcy has not made him just to you! If from no bettermotive, that he should not have been too proud to be dishonest--fordishonesty I must call it.”“It _is_ wonderful,” replied Wickham, “for almost all his actions maybe traced to pride; and pride had often been his best friend. It hasconnected him nearer with virtue than with any other feeling. But we arenone of us consistent, and in his behaviour to me there were strongerimpulses even than pride.”“Can such abominable pride as his have ever done him good?”“Yes. It has often led him to be liberal and generous, to give his moneyfreely, to display hospitality, to assist his tenants, and relieve thepoor. Family pride, and _filial_ pride--for he is very proud of whathis father was--have done this. Not to appear to disgrace his family,to degenerate from the popular qualities, or lose the influence of thePemberley House, is a powerful motive. He has also _brotherly_ pride,which, with _some_ brotherly affection, makes him a very kind andcareful guardian of his sister, and you will hear him generally cried upas the most attentive and best of brothers.”“What sort of girl is Miss Darcy?”He shook his head. “I wish I could call her amiable. It gives me pain tospeak ill of a Darcy. But she is too much like her brother--very, veryproud. As a child, she was affectionate and pleasing, and extremely fondof me; and I have devoted hours and hours to her amusement. But she isnothing to me now. She is a handsome girl, about fifteen or sixteen,and, I understand, highly accomplished. Since her father’s death, herhome has been London, where a lady lives with her, and superintends hereducation.”After many pauses and many trials of other subjects, Elizabeth could nothelp reverting once more to the first, and saying:“I am astonished at his intimacy with Mr. Bingley! How can Mr. Bingley,who seems good humour itself, and is, I really believe, truly amiable,be in friendship with such a man? How can they suit each other? Do youknow Mr. Bingley?”“Not at all.”“He is a sweet-tempered, amiable, charming man. He cannot know what Mr.Darcy is.”“Probably not; but Mr. Darcy can please where he chooses. He does notwant abilities. He can be a conversible companion if he thinks it worthhis while. Among those who are at all his equals in consequence, he isa very different man from what he is to the less prosperous. Hispride never deserts him; but with the rich he is liberal-minded, just,sincere, rational, honourable, and perhaps agreeable--allowing somethingfor fortune and figure.”The whist party soon afterwards breaking up, the players gathered roundthe other table and Mr. Collins took his station between his cousinElizabeth and Mrs. Phillips. The usual inquiries as to his success weremade by the latter. It had not been very great; he had lost everypoint; but when Mrs. Phillips began to express her concern thereupon,he assured her with much earnest gravity that it was not of the leastimportance, that he considered the money as a mere trifle, and beggedthat she would not make herself uneasy.“I know very well, madam,” said he, “that when persons sit down to acard-table, they must take their chances of these things, and happily Iam not in such circumstances as to make five shillings any object. Thereare undoubtedly many who could not say the same, but thanks to LadyCatherine de Bourgh, I am removed far beyond the necessity of regardinglittle matters.”Mr. Wickham’s attention was caught; and after observing Mr. Collins fora few moments, he asked Elizabeth in a low voice whether her relationwas very intimately acquainted with the family of de Bourgh.“Lady Catherine de Bourgh,” she replied, “has very lately given hima living. I hardly know how Mr. Collins was first introduced to hernotice, but he certainly has not known her long.”“You know of course that Lady Catherine de Bourgh and Lady Anne Darcywere sisters; consequently that she is aunt to the present Mr. Darcy.”“No, indeed, I did not. I knew nothing at all of Lady Catherine’sconnections. I never heard of her existence till the day beforeyesterday.”“Her daughter, Miss de Bourgh, will have a very large fortune, and it isbelieved that she and her cousin will unite the two estates.”This information made Elizabeth smile, as she thought of poor MissBingley. Vain indeed must be all her attentions, vain and useless heraffection for his sister and her praise of himself, if he were alreadyself-destined for another.“Mr. Collins,” said she, “speaks highly both of Lady Catherine and herdaughter; but from some particulars that he has related of her ladyship,I suspect his gratitude misleads him, and that in spite of her being hispatroness, she is an arrogant, conceited woman.”“I believe her to be both in a great degree,” replied Wickham; “I havenot seen her for many years, but I very well remember that I never likedher, and that her manners were dictatorial and insolent. She has thereputation of being remarkably sensible and clever; but I rather believeshe derives part of her abilities from her rank and fortune, part fromher authoritative manner, and the rest from the pride for hernephew, who chooses that everyone connected with him should have anunderstanding of the first class.”Elizabeth allowed that he had given a very rational account of it, andthey continued talking together, with mutual satisfaction till supperput an end to cards, and gave the rest of the ladies their share of Mr.Wickham’s attentions. There could be no conversation in the noiseof Mrs. Phillips’s supper party, but his manners recommended him toeverybody. Whatever he said, was said well; and whatever he did, donegracefully. Elizabeth went away with her head full of him. She couldthink of nothing but of Mr. Wickham, and of what he had told her, allthe way home; but there was not time for her even to mention his nameas they went, for neither Lydia nor Mr. Collins were once silent. Lydiatalked incessantly of lottery tickets, of the fish she had lost and thefish she had won; and Mr. Collins in describing the civility of Mr. andMrs. Phillips, protesting that he did not in the least regard his lossesat whist, enumerating all the dishes at supper, and repeatedly fearingthat he crowded his cousins, had more to say than he could well managebefore the carriage stopped at Longbourn House.Chapter 17Elizabeth related to Jane the next day what had passed between Mr.Wickham and herself. Jane listened with astonishment and concern; sheknew not how to believe that Mr. Darcy could be so unworthy of Mr.Bingley’s regard; and yet, it was not in her nature to question theveracity of a young man of such amiable appearance as Wickham. Thepossibility of his having endured such unkindness, was enough tointerest all her tender feelings; and nothing remained therefore to bedone, but to think well of them both, to defend the conduct of each,and throw into the account of accident or mistake whatever could not beotherwise explained.“They have both,” said she, “been deceived, I dare say, in some wayor other, of which we can form no idea. Interested people have perhapsmisrepresented each to the other. It is, in short, impossible for us toconjecture the causes or circumstances which may have alienated them,without actual blame on either side.”“Very true, indeed; and now, my dear Jane, what have you got to say onbehalf of the interested people who have probably been concerned in thebusiness? Do clear _them_ too, or we shall be obliged to think ill ofsomebody.”“Laugh as much as you choose, but you will not laugh me out of myopinion. My dearest Lizzy, do but consider in what a disgraceful lightit places Mr. Darcy, to be treating his father’s favourite in sucha manner, one whom his father had promised to provide for. It isimpossible. No man of common humanity, no man who had any value for hischaracter, could be capable of it. Can his most intimate friends be soexcessively deceived in him? Oh! no.”“I can much more easily believe Mr. Bingley’s being imposed on, thanthat Mr. Wickham should invent such a history of himself as he gave melast night; names, facts, everything mentioned without ceremony. If itbe not so, let Mr. Darcy contradict it. Besides, there was truth in hislooks.”“It is difficult indeed--it is distressing. One does not know what tothink.”“I beg your pardon; one knows exactly what to think.”But Jane could think with certainty on only one point--that Mr. Bingley,if he _had_ been imposed on, would have much to suffer when the affairbecame public.The two young ladies were summoned from the shrubbery, where thisconversation passed, by the arrival of the very persons of whom they hadbeen speaking; Mr. Bingley and his sisters came to give their personalinvitation for the long-expected ball at Netherfield, which was fixedfor the following Tuesday. The two ladies were delighted to see theirdear friend again, called it an age since they had met, and repeatedlyasked what she had been doing with herself since their separation. Tothe rest of the family they paid little attention; avoiding Mrs. Bennetas much as possible, saying not much to Elizabeth, and nothing at all tothe others. They were soon gone again, rising from their seats with anactivity which took their brother by surprise, and hurrying off as ifeager to escape from Mrs. Bennet’s civilities.The prospect of the Netherfield ball was extremely agreeable to everyfemale of the family. Mrs. Bennet chose to consider it as given incompliment to her eldest daughter, and was particularly flatteredby receiving the invitation from Mr. Bingley himself, instead of aceremonious card. Jane pictured to herself a happy evening in thesociety of her two friends, and the attentions of their brother; andElizabeth thought with pleasure of dancing a great deal with Mr.Wickham, and of seeing a confirmation of everything in Mr. Darcy’s lookand behaviour. The happiness anticipated by Catherine and Lydia dependedless on any single event, or any particular person, for though theyeach, like Elizabeth, meant to dance half the evening with Mr. Wickham,he was by no means the only partner who could satisfy them, and a ballwas, at any rate, a ball. And even Mary could assure her family that shehad no disinclination for it.“While I can have my mornings to myself,” said she, “it is enough--Ithink it is no sacrifice to join occasionally in evening engagements.Society has claims on us all; and I profess myself one of thosewho consider intervals of recreation and amusement as desirable foreverybody.”Elizabeth’s spirits were so high on this occasion, that though she didnot often speak unnecessarily to Mr. Collins, she could not help askinghim whether he intended to accept Mr. Bingley’s invitation, and ifhe did, whether he would think it proper to join in the evening’samusement; and she was rather surprised to find that he entertained noscruple whatever on that head, and was very far from dreading a rebukeeither from the Archbishop, or Lady Catherine de Bourgh, by venturing todance.“I am by no means of the opinion, I assure you,” said he, “that a ballof this kind, given by a young man of character, to respectable people,can have any evil tendency; and I am so far from objecting to dancingmyself, that I shall hope to be honoured with the hands of all my faircousins in the course of the evening; and I take this opportunity ofsoliciting yours, Miss Elizabeth, for the two first dances especially,a preference which I trust my cousin Jane will attribute to the rightcause, and not to any disrespect for her.”Elizabeth felt herself completely taken in. She had fully proposed beingengaged by Mr. Wickham for those very dances; and to have Mr. Collinsinstead! her liveliness had never been worse timed. There was no helpfor it, however. Mr. Wickham’s happiness and her own were perforcedelayed a little longer, and Mr. Collins’s proposal accepted with asgood a grace as she could. She was not the better pleased with hisgallantry from the idea it suggested of something more. It now firststruck her, that _she_ was selected from among her sisters as worthyof being mistress of Hunsford Parsonage, and of assisting to form aquadrille table at Rosings, in the absence of more eligible visitors.The idea soon reached to conviction, as she observed his increasingcivilities toward herself, and heard his frequent attempt at acompliment on her wit and vivacity; and though more astonished thangratified herself by this effect of her charms, it was not long beforeher mother gave her to understand that the probability of their marriagewas extremely agreeable to _her_. Elizabeth, however, did not chooseto take the hint, being well aware that a serious dispute must be theconsequence of any reply. Mr. Collins might never make the offer, andtill he did, it was useless to quarrel about him.If there had not been a Netherfield ball to prepare for and talk of, theyounger Miss Bennets would have been in a very pitiable state at thistime, for from the day of the invitation, to the day of the ball, therewas such a succession of rain as prevented their walking to Merytononce. No aunt, no officers, no news could be sought after--the veryshoe-roses for Netherfield were got by proxy. Even Elizabeth might havefound some trial of her patience in weather which totally suspended theimprovement of her acquaintance with Mr. Wickham; and nothing less thana dance on Tuesday, could have made such a Friday, Saturday, Sunday, andMonday endurable to Kitty and Lydia.Chapter 18Till Elizabeth entered the drawing-room at Netherfield, and looked invain for Mr. Wickham among the cluster of red coats there assembled, adoubt of his being present had never occurred to her. The certaintyof meeting him had not been checked by any of those recollections thatmight not unreasonably have alarmed her. She had dressed with more thanusual care, and prepared in the highest spirits for the conquest of allthat remained unsubdued of his heart, trusting that it was not more thanmight be won in the course of the evening. But in an instant arosethe dreadful suspicion of his being purposely omitted for Mr. Darcy’spleasure in the Bingleys’ invitation to the officers; and thoughthis was not exactly the case, the absolute fact of his absence waspronounced by his friend Denny, to whom Lydia eagerly applied, and whotold them that Wickham had been obliged to go to town on business theday before, and was not yet returned; adding, with a significant smile,“I do not imagine his business would have called him away just now, ifhe had not wanted to avoid a certain gentleman here.”This part of his intelligence, though unheard by Lydia, was caught byElizabeth, and, as it assured her that Darcy was not less answerable forWickham’s absence than if her first surmise had been just, everyfeeling of displeasure against the former was so sharpened by immediatedisappointment, that she could hardly reply with tolerable civility tothe polite inquiries which he directly afterwards approached to make.Attendance, forbearance, patience with Darcy, was injury to Wickham. Shewas resolved against any sort of conversation with him, and turned awaywith a degree of ill-humour which she could not wholly surmount even inspeaking to Mr. Bingley, whose blind partiality provoked her.But Elizabeth was not formed for ill-humour; and though every prospectof her own was destroyed for the evening, it could not dwell long on herspirits; and having told all her griefs to Charlotte Lucas, whom she hadnot seen for a week, she was soon able to make a voluntary transitionto the oddities of her cousin, and to point him out to her particularnotice. The first two dances, however, brought a return of distress;they were dances of mortification. Mr. Collins, awkward and solemn,apologising instead of attending, and often moving wrong without beingaware of it, gave her all the shame and misery which a disagreeablepartner for a couple of dances can give. The moment of her release fromhim was ecstasy.She danced next with an officer, and had the refreshment of talking ofWickham, and of hearing that he was universally liked. When those danceswere over, she returned to Charlotte Lucas, and was in conversation withher, when she found herself suddenly addressed by Mr. Darcy who tookher so much by surprise in his application for her hand, that,without knowing what she did, she accepted him. He walked away againimmediately, and she was left to fret over her own want of presence ofmind; Charlotte tried to console her:“I dare say you will find him very agreeable.”“Heaven forbid! _That_ would be the greatest misfortune of all! To finda man agreeable whom one is determined to hate! Do not wish me such anevil.”When the dancing recommenced, however, and Darcy approached to claim herhand, Charlotte could not help cautioning her in a whisper, not to be asimpleton, and allow her fancy for Wickham to make her appear unpleasantin the eyes of a man ten times his consequence. Elizabeth made noanswer, and took her place in the set, amazed at the dignity to whichshe was arrived in being allowed to stand opposite to Mr. Darcy, andreading in her neighbours’ looks, their equal amazement in beholdingit. They stood for some time without speaking a word; and she began toimagine that their silence was to last through the two dances, and atfirst was resolved not to break it; till suddenly fancying that it wouldbe the greater punishment to her partner to oblige him to talk, she madesome slight observation on the dance. He replied, and was againsilent. After a pause of some minutes, she addressed him a second timewith:--“It is _your_ turn to say something now, Mr. Darcy. I talkedabout the dance, and _you_ ought to make some sort of remark on the sizeof the room, or the number of couples.”He smiled, and assured her that whatever she wished him to say should besaid.“Very well. That reply will do for the present. Perhaps by and by I mayobserve that private balls are much pleasanter than public ones. But_now_ we may be silent.”“Do you talk by rule, then, while you are dancing?”“Sometimes. One must speak a little, you know. It would look odd to beentirely silent for half an hour together; and yet for the advantage of_some_, conversation ought to be so arranged, as that they may have thetrouble of saying as little as possible.”“Are you consulting your own feelings in the present case, or do youimagine that you are gratifying mine?”“Both,” replied Elizabeth archly; “for I have always seen a greatsimilarity in the turn of our minds. We are each of an unsocial,taciturn disposition, unwilling to speak, unless we expect to saysomething that will amaze the whole room, and be handed down toposterity with all the eclat of a proverb.”“This is no very striking resemblance of your own character, I am sure,” said he. “How near it may be to _mine_, I cannot pretend to say. _You_think it a faithful portrait undoubtedly.”“I must not decide on my own performance.”He made no answer, and they were again silent till they had gone downthe dance, when he asked her if she and her sisters did not very oftenwalk to Meryton. She answered in the affirmative, and, unable to resistthe temptation, added, “When you met us there the other day, we had justbeen forming a new acquaintance.”The effect was immediate. A deeper shade of _hauteur_ overspread hisfeatures, but he said not a word, and Elizabeth, though blaming herselffor her own weakness, could not go on. At length Darcy spoke, and in aconstrained manner said, “Mr. Wickham is blessed with such happy mannersas may ensure his _making_ friends--whether he may be equally capable of_retaining_ them, is less certain.”“He has been so unlucky as to lose _your_ friendship,” replied Elizabethwith emphasis, “and in a manner which he is likely to suffer from allhis life.”Darcy made no answer, and seemed desirous of changing the subject. Atthat moment, Sir William Lucas appeared close to them, meaning to passthrough the set to the other side of the room; but on perceiving Mr.Darcy, he stopped with a bow of superior courtesy to compliment him onhis dancing and his partner.“I have been most highly gratified indeed, my dear sir. Such verysuperior dancing is not often seen. It is evident that you belong to thefirst circles. Allow me to say, however, that your fair partner does notdisgrace you, and that I must hope to have this pleasure often repeated,especially when a certain desirable event, my dear Eliza (glancing ather sister and Bingley) shall take place. What congratulations will thenflow in! I appeal to Mr. Darcy:--but let me not interrupt you, sir. Youwill not thank me for detaining you from the bewitching converse of thatyoung lady, whose bright eyes are also upbraiding me.”The latter part of this address was scarcely heard by Darcy; but SirWilliam’s allusion to his friend seemed to strike him forcibly, and hiseyes were directed with a very serious expression towards Bingley andJane, who were dancing together. Recovering himself, however, shortly,he turned to his partner, and said, “Sir William’s interruption has mademe forget what we were talking of.”“I do not think we were speaking at all. Sir William could not haveinterrupted two people in the room who had less to say for themselves.We have tried two or three subjects already without success, and what weare to talk of next I cannot imagine.”“What think you of books?” said he, smiling.“Books--oh! no. I am sure we never read the same, or not with the samefeelings.”“I am sorry you think so; but if that be the case, there can at least beno want of subject. We may compare our different opinions.”“No--I cannot talk of books in a ball-room; my head is always full ofsomething else.”“The _present_ always occupies you in such scenes--does it?” said he,with a look of doubt.“Yes, always,” she replied, without knowing what she said, for herthoughts had wandered far from the subject, as soon afterwards appearedby her suddenly exclaiming, “I remember hearing you once say, Mr. Darcy,that you hardly ever forgave, that your resentment once created wasunappeasable. You are very cautious, I suppose, as to its _beingcreated_.”“I am,” said he, with a firm voice.“And never allow yourself to be blinded by prejudice?”“I hope not.”“It is particularly incumbent on those who never change their opinion,to be secure of judging properly at first.”“May I ask to what these questions tend?”“Merely to the illustration of _your_ character,” said she, endeavouringto shake off her gravity. “I am trying to make it out.”“And what is your success?”She shook her head. “I do not get on at all. I hear such differentaccounts of you as puzzle me exceedingly.”“I can readily believe,” answered he gravely, “that reports may varygreatly with respect to me; and I could wish, Miss Bennet, that you werenot to sketch my character at the present moment, as there is reason tofear that the performance would reflect no credit on either.”“But if I do not take your likeness now, I may never have anotheropportunity.”“I would by no means suspend any pleasure of yours,” he coldly replied.She said no more, and they went down the other dance and parted insilence; and on each side dissatisfied, though not to an equal degree,for in Darcy’s breast there was a tolerably powerful feeling towardsher, which soon procured her pardon, and directed all his anger againstanother.They had not long separated, when Miss Bingley came towards her, andwith an expression of civil disdain accosted her:“So, Miss Eliza, I hear you are quite delighted with George Wickham!Your sister has been talking to me about him, and asking me a thousandquestions; and I find that the young man quite forgot to tell you, amonghis other communication, that he was the son of old Wickham, the lateMr. Darcy’s steward. Let me recommend you, however, as a friend, not togive implicit confidence to all his assertions; for as to Mr. Darcy’susing him ill, it is perfectly false; for, on the contrary, he hasalways been remarkably kind to him, though George Wickham has treatedMr. Darcy in a most infamous manner. I do not know the particulars, butI know very well that Mr. Darcy is not in the least to blame, that hecannot bear to hear George Wickham mentioned, and that though my brotherthought that he could not well avoid including him in his invitation tothe officers, he was excessively glad to find that he had taken himselfout of the way. His coming into the country at all is a most insolentthing, indeed, and I wonder how he could presume to do it. I pity you,Miss Eliza, for this discovery of your favourite’s guilt; but really,considering his descent, one could not expect much better.”“His guilt and his descent appear by your account to be the same,” saidElizabeth angrily; “for I have heard you accuse him of nothing worsethan of being the son of Mr. Darcy’s steward, and of _that_, I canassure you, he informed me himself.”“I beg your pardon,” replied Miss Bingley, turning away with a sneer.“Excuse my interference--it was kindly meant.”“Insolent girl!” said Elizabeth to herself. “You are much mistakenif you expect to influence me by such a paltry attack as this. I seenothing in it but your own wilful ignorance and the malice of Mr.Darcy.” She then sought her eldest sister, who had undertaken to makeinquiries on the same subject of Bingley. Jane met her with a smile ofsuch sweet complacency, a glow of such happy expression, as sufficientlymarked how well she was satisfied with the occurrences of the evening.Elizabeth instantly read her feelings, and at that moment solicitude forWickham, resentment against his enemies, and everything else, gave waybefore the hope of Jane’s being in the fairest way for happiness.“I want to know,” said she, with a countenance no less smiling than hersister’s, “what you have learnt about Mr. Wickham. But perhaps you havebeen too pleasantly engaged to think of any third person; in which caseyou may be sure of my pardon.”“No,” replied Jane, “I have not forgotten him; but I have nothingsatisfactory to tell you. Mr. Bingley does not know the whole ofhis history, and is quite ignorant of the circumstances which haveprincipally offended Mr. Darcy; but he will vouch for the good conduct,the probity, and honour of his friend, and is perfectly convinced thatMr. Wickham has deserved much less attention from Mr. Darcy than he hasreceived; and I am sorry to say by his account as well as his sister’s,Mr. Wickham is by no means a respectable young man. I am afraid he hasbeen very imprudent, and has deserved to lose Mr. Darcy’s regard.”“Mr. Bingley does not know Mr. Wickham himself?”“No; he never saw him till the other morning at Meryton.”“This account then is what he has received from Mr. Darcy. I amsatisfied. But what does he say of the living?”“He does not exactly recollect the circumstances, though he has heardthem from Mr. Darcy more than once, but he believes that it was left tohim _conditionally_ only.”“I have not a doubt of Mr. Bingley’s sincerity,” said Elizabeth warmly;“but you must excuse my not being convinced by assurances only. Mr.Bingley’s defense of his friend was a very able one, I dare say; butsince he is unacquainted with several parts of the story, and has learntthe rest from that friend himself, I shall venture to still think ofboth gentlemen as I did before.”She then changed the discourse to one more gratifying to each, and onwhich there could be no difference of sentiment. Elizabeth listened withdelight to the happy, though modest hopes which Jane entertained of Mr.Bingley’s regard, and said all in her power to heighten her confidencein it. On their being joined by Mr. Bingley himself, Elizabeth withdrewto Miss Lucas; to whose inquiry after the pleasantness of her lastpartner she had scarcely replied, before Mr. Collins came up to them,and told her with great exultation that he had just been so fortunate asto make a most important discovery.“I have found out,” said he, “by a singular accident, that there is nowin the room a near relation of my patroness. I happened to overhear thegentleman himself mentioning to the young lady who does the honours ofthe house the names of his cousin Miss de Bourgh, and of her mother LadyCatherine. How wonderfully these sort of things occur! Who would havethought of my meeting with, perhaps, a nephew of Lady Catherine deBourgh in this assembly! I am most thankful that the discovery is madein time for me to pay my respects to him, which I am now going todo, and trust he will excuse my not having done it before. My totalignorance of the connection must plead my apology.”“You are not going to introduce yourself to Mr. Darcy!”“Indeed I am. I shall entreat his pardon for not having done it earlier.I believe him to be Lady Catherine’s _nephew_. It will be in my power toassure him that her ladyship was quite well yesterday se’nnight.”Elizabeth tried hard to dissuade him from such a scheme, assuring himthat Mr. Darcy would consider his addressing him without introductionas an impertinent freedom, rather than a compliment to his aunt; thatit was not in the least necessary there should be any notice on eitherside; and that if it were, it must belong to Mr. Darcy, the superior inconsequence, to begin the acquaintance. Mr. Collins listened to herwith the determined air of following his own inclination, and, when sheceased speaking, replied thus:“My dear Miss Elizabeth, I have the highest opinion in the world inyour excellent judgement in all matters within the scope of yourunderstanding; but permit me to say, that there must be a widedifference between the established forms of ceremony amongst the laity,and those which regulate the clergy; for, give me leave to observe thatI consider the clerical office as equal in point of dignity withthe highest rank in the kingdom--provided that a proper humility ofbehaviour is at the same time maintained. You must therefore allow me tofollow the dictates of my conscience on this occasion, which leads me toperform what I look on as a point of duty. Pardon me for neglecting toprofit by your advice, which on every other subject shall be my constantguide, though in the case before us I consider myself more fitted byeducation and habitual study to decide on what is right than a younglady like yourself.” And with a low bow he left her to attack Mr.Darcy, whose reception of his advances she eagerly watched, and whoseastonishment at being so addressed was very evident. Her cousin prefacedhis speech with a solemn bow and though she could not hear a word ofit, she felt as if hearing it all, and saw in the motion of his lips thewords “apology,” “Hunsford,” and “Lady Catherine de Bourgh.” It vexedher to see him expose himself to such a man. Mr. Darcy was eyeing himwith unrestrained wonder, and when at last Mr. Collins allowed him timeto speak, replied with an air of distant civility. Mr. Collins, however,was not discouraged from speaking again, and Mr. Darcy’s contempt seemedabundantly increasing with the length of his second speech, and at theend of it he only made him a slight bow, and moved another way. Mr.Collins then returned to Elizabeth.“I have no reason, I assure you,” said he, “to be dissatisfied with myreception. Mr. Darcy seemed much pleased with the attention. He answeredme with the utmost civility, and even paid me the compliment of sayingthat he was so well convinced of Lady Catherine’s discernment as to becertain she could never bestow a favour unworthily. It was really a veryhandsome thought. Upon the whole, I am much pleased with him.”As Elizabeth had no longer any interest of her own to pursue, she turnedher attention almost entirely on her sister and Mr. Bingley; and thetrain of agreeable reflections which her observations gave birth to,made her perhaps almost as happy as Jane. She saw her in idea settled inthat very house, in all the felicity which a marriage of true affectioncould bestow; and she felt capable, under such circumstances, ofendeavouring even to like Bingley’s two sisters. Her mother’s thoughtsshe plainly saw were bent the same way, and she determined not toventure near her, lest she might hear too much. When they sat down tosupper, therefore, she considered it a most unlucky perverseness whichplaced them within one of each other; and deeply was she vexed to findthat her mother was talking to that one person (Lady Lucas) freely,openly, and of nothing else but her expectation that Jane would soonbe married to Mr. Bingley. It was an animating subject, and Mrs. Bennetseemed incapable of fatigue while enumerating the advantages of thematch. His being such a charming young man, and so rich, and living butthree miles from them, were the first points of self-gratulation; andthen it was such a comfort to think how fond the two sisters were ofJane, and to be certain that they must desire the connection as much asshe could do. It was, moreover, such a promising thing for her youngerdaughters, as Jane’s marrying so greatly must throw them in the way ofother rich men; and lastly, it was so pleasant at her time of life to beable to consign her single daughters to the care of their sister, thatshe might not be obliged to go into company more than she liked. It wasnecessary to make this circumstance a matter of pleasure, because onsuch occasions it is the etiquette; but no one was less likely than Mrs.Bennet to find comfort in staying home at any period of her life. Sheconcluded with many good wishes that Lady Lucas might soon be equallyfortunate, though evidently and triumphantly believing there was nochance of it.In vain did Elizabeth endeavour to check the rapidity of her mother’swords, or persuade her to describe her felicity in a less audiblewhisper; for, to her inexpressible vexation, she could perceive that thechief of it was overheard by Mr. Darcy, who sat opposite to them. Hermother only scolded her for being nonsensical.“What is Mr. Darcy to me, pray, that I should be afraid of him? I amsure we owe him no such particular civility as to be obliged to saynothing _he_ may not like to hear.”“For heaven’s sake, madam, speak lower. What advantage can it be for youto offend Mr. Darcy? You will never recommend yourself to his friend byso doing!”Nothing that she could say, however, had any influence. Her mother wouldtalk of her views in the same intelligible tone. Elizabeth blushed andblushed again with shame and vexation. She could not help frequentlyglancing her eye at Mr. Darcy, though every glance convinced her of whatshe dreaded; for though he was not always looking at her mother, she wasconvinced that his attention was invariably fixed by her. The expressionof his face changed gradually from indignant contempt to a composed andsteady gravity.At length, however, Mrs. Bennet had no more to say; and Lady Lucas, whohad been long yawning at the repetition of delights which she saw nolikelihood of sharing, was left to the comforts of cold ham andchicken. Elizabeth now began to revive. But not long was the interval oftranquillity; for, when supper was over, singing was talked of, andshe had the mortification of seeing Mary, after very little entreaty,preparing to oblige the company. By many significant looks and silententreaties, did she endeavour to prevent such a proof of complaisance,but in vain; Mary would not understand them; such an opportunity ofexhibiting was delightful to her, and she began her song. Elizabeth’seyes were fixed on her with most painful sensations, and she watched herprogress through the several stanzas with an impatience which was veryill rewarded at their close; for Mary, on receiving, amongst the thanksof the table, the hint of a hope that she might be prevailed on tofavour them again, after the pause of half a minute began another.Mary’s powers were by no means fitted for such a display; her voice wasweak, and her manner affected. Elizabeth was in agonies. She looked atJane, to see how she bore it; but Jane was very composedly talking toBingley. She looked at his two sisters, and saw them making signsof derision at each other, and at Darcy, who continued, however,imperturbably grave. She looked at her father to entreat hisinterference, lest Mary should be singing all night. He took the hint,and when Mary had finished her second song, said aloud, “That will doextremely well, child. You have delighted us long enough. Let the otheryoung ladies have time to exhibit.”Mary, though pretending not to hear, was somewhat disconcerted; andElizabeth, sorry for her, and sorry for her father’s speech, was afraidher anxiety had done no good. Others of the party were now applied to.“If I,” said Mr. Collins, “were so fortunate as to be able to sing, Ishould have great pleasure, I am sure, in obliging the company with anair; for I consider music as a very innocent diversion, and perfectlycompatible with the profession of a clergyman. I do not mean, however,to assert that we can be justified in devoting too much of our timeto music, for there are certainly other things to be attended to. Therector of a parish has much to do. In the first place, he must makesuch an agreement for tithes as may be beneficial to himself and notoffensive to his patron. He must write his own sermons; and the timethat remains will not be too much for his parish duties, and the careand improvement of his dwelling, which he cannot be excused from makingas comfortable as possible. And I do not think it of light importancethat he should have attentive and conciliatory manners towards everybody,especially towards those to whom he owes his preferment. I cannot acquithim of that duty; nor could I think well of the man who should omit anoccasion of testifying his respect towards anybody connected with thefamily.” And with a bow to Mr. Darcy, he concluded his speech, which hadbeen spoken so loud as to be heard by half the room. Many stared--manysmiled; but no one looked more amused than Mr. Bennet himself, while hiswife seriously commended Mr. Collins for having spoken so sensibly,and observed in a half-whisper to Lady Lucas, that he was a remarkablyclever, good kind of young man.To Elizabeth it appeared that, had her family made an agreement toexpose themselves as much as they could during the evening, it wouldhave been impossible for them to play their parts with more spirit orfiner success; and happy did she think it for Bingley and her sisterthat some of the exhibition had escaped his notice, and that hisfeelings were not of a sort to be much distressed by the folly which hemust have witnessed. That his two sisters and Mr. Darcy, however, shouldhave such an opportunity of ridiculing her relations, was bad enough,and she could not determine whether the silent contempt of thegentleman, or the insolent smiles of the ladies, were more intolerable.The rest of the evening brought her little amusement. She was teased byMr. Collins, who continued most perseveringly by her side, and thoughhe could not prevail on her to dance with him again, put it out of herpower to dance with others. In vain did she entreat him to stand up withsomebody else, and offer to introduce him to any young lady in the room.He assured her, that as to dancing, he was perfectly indifferent to it;that his chief object was by delicate attentions to recommend himself toher and that he should therefore make a point of remaining close to herthe whole evening. There was no arguing upon such a project. She owedher greatest relief to her friend Miss Lucas, who often joined them, andgood-naturedly engaged Mr. Collins’s conversation to herself.She was at least free from the offense of Mr. Darcy’s further notice;though often standing within a very short distance of her, quitedisengaged, he never came near enough to speak. She felt it to be theprobable consequence of her allusions to Mr. Wickham, and rejoiced init.The Longbourn party were the last of all the company to depart, and, bya manoeuvre of Mrs. Bennet, had to wait for their carriage a quarter ofan hour after everybody else was gone, which gave them time to see howheartily they were wished away by some of the family. Mrs. Hurst and hersister scarcely opened their mouths, except to complain of fatigue, andwere evidently impatient to have the house to themselves. They repulsedevery attempt of Mrs. Bennet at conversation, and by so doing threw alanguor over the whole party, which was very little relieved by thelong speeches of Mr. Collins, who was complimenting Mr. Bingley and hissisters on the elegance of their entertainment, and the hospitality andpoliteness which had marked their behaviour to their guests. Darcy saidnothing at all. Mr. Bennet, in equal silence, was enjoying the scene.Mr. Bingley and Jane were standing together, a little detached from therest, and talked only to each other. Elizabeth preserved as steady asilence as either Mrs. Hurst or Miss Bingley; and even Lydia was toomuch fatigued to utter more than the occasional exclamation of “Lord,how tired I am!” accompanied by a violent yawn.When at length they arose to take leave, Mrs. Bennet was most pressinglycivil in her hope of seeing the whole family soon at Longbourn, andaddressed herself especially to Mr. Bingley, to assure him how happy hewould make them by eating a family dinner with them at any time, withoutthe ceremony of a formal invitation. Bingley was all grateful pleasure,and he readily engaged for taking the earliest opportunity of waiting onher, after his return from London, whither he was obliged to go the nextday for a short time.Mrs. Bennet was perfectly satisfied, and quitted the house under thedelightful persuasion that, allowing for the necessary preparations ofsettlements, new carriages, and wedding clothes, she should undoubtedlysee her daughter settled at Netherfield in the course of three or fourmonths. Of having another daughter married to Mr. Collins, she thoughtwith equal certainty, and with considerable, though not equal, pleasure.Elizabeth was the least dear to her of all her children; and though theman and the match were quite good enough for _her_, the worth of eachwas eclipsed by Mr. Bingley and Netherfield.Chapter 19The next day opened a new scene at Longbourn. Mr. Collins made hisdeclaration in form. Having resolved to do it without loss of time, ashis leave of absence extended only to the following Saturday, and havingno feelings of diffidence to make it distressing to himself even atthe moment, he set about it in a very orderly manner, with all theobservances, which he supposed a regular part of the business. Onfinding Mrs. Bennet, Elizabeth, and one of the younger girls together,soon after breakfast, he addressed the mother in these words:“May I hope, madam, for your interest with your fair daughter Elizabeth,when I solicit for the honour of a private audience with her in thecourse of this morning?”Before Elizabeth had time for anything but a blush of surprise, Mrs.Bennet answered instantly, “Oh dear!--yes--certainly. I am sure Lizzywill be very happy--I am sure she can have no objection. Come, Kitty, Iwant you up stairs.” And, gathering her work together, she was hasteningaway, when Elizabeth called out:“Dear madam, do not go. I beg you will not go. Mr. Collins must excuseme. He can have nothing to say to me that anybody need not hear. I amgoing away myself.”“No, no, nonsense, Lizzy. I desire you to stay where you are.” And uponElizabeth’s seeming really, with vexed and embarrassed looks, about toescape, she added: “Lizzy, I _insist_ upon your staying and hearing Mr.Collins.”Elizabeth would not oppose such an injunction--and a moment’sconsideration making her also sensible that it would be wisest to get itover as soon and as quietly as possible, she sat down again and tried toconceal, by incessant employment the feelings which were divided betweendistress and diversion. Mrs. Bennet and Kitty walked off, and as soon asthey were gone, Mr. Collins began.“Believe me, my dear Miss Elizabeth, that your modesty, so far fromdoing you any disservice, rather adds to your other perfections. Youwould have been less amiable in my eyes had there _not_ been this littleunwillingness; but allow me to assure you, that I have your respectedmother’s permission for this address. You can hardly doubt thepurport of my discourse, however your natural delicacy may lead you todissemble; my attentions have been too marked to be mistaken. Almost assoon as I entered the house, I singled you out as the companion ofmy future life. But before I am run away with by my feelings on thissubject, perhaps it would be advisable for me to state my reasons formarrying--and, moreover, for coming into Hertfordshire with the designof selecting a wife, as I certainly did.”The idea of Mr. Collins, with all his solemn composure, being run awaywith by his feelings, made Elizabeth so near laughing, that she couldnot use the short pause he allowed in any attempt to stop him further,and he continued:“My reasons for marrying are, first, that I think it a right thing forevery clergyman in easy circumstances (like myself) to set the exampleof matrimony in his parish; secondly, that I am convinced that it willadd very greatly to my happiness; and thirdly--which perhaps I oughtto have mentioned earlier, that it is the particular advice andrecommendation of the very noble lady whom I have the honour of callingpatroness. Twice has she condescended to give me her opinion (unaskedtoo!) on this subject; and it was but the very Saturday night before Ileft Hunsford--between our pools at quadrille, while Mrs. Jenkinson wasarranging Miss de Bourgh’s footstool, that she said, ‘Mr. Collins, youmust marry. A clergyman like you must marry. Choose properly, choosea gentlewoman for _my_ sake; and for your _own_, let her be an active,useful sort of person, not brought up high, but able to make a smallincome go a good way. This is my advice. Find such a woman as soon asyou can, bring her to Hunsford, and I will visit her.’ Allow me, by theway, to observe, my fair cousin, that I do not reckon the noticeand kindness of Lady Catherine de Bourgh as among the least of theadvantages in my power to offer. You will find her manners beyondanything I can describe; and your wit and vivacity, I think, must beacceptable to her, especially when tempered with the silence andrespect which her rank will inevitably excite. Thus much for my generalintention in favour of matrimony; it remains to be told why my viewswere directed towards Longbourn instead of my own neighbourhood, where Ican assure you there are many amiable young women. But the fact is, thatbeing, as I am, to inherit this estate after the death of your honouredfather (who, however, may live many years longer), I could not satisfymyself without resolving to choose a wife from among his daughters, thatthe loss to them might be as little as possible, when the melancholyevent takes place--which, however, as I have already said, may notbe for several years. This has been my motive, my fair cousin, andI flatter myself it will not sink me in your esteem. And now nothingremains for me but to assure you in the most animated language of theviolence of my affection. To fortune I am perfectly indifferent, andshall make no demand of that nature on your father, since I am wellaware that it could not be complied with; and that one thousand poundsin the four per cents, which will not be yours till after your mother’sdecease, is all that you may ever be entitled to. On that head,therefore, I shall be uniformly silent; and you may assure yourself thatno ungenerous reproach shall ever pass my lips when we are married.”It was absolutely necessary to interrupt him now.“You are too hasty, sir,” she cried. “You forget that I have made noanswer. Let me do it without further loss of time. Accept my thanks forthe compliment you are paying me. I am very sensible of the honour ofyour proposals, but it is impossible for me to do otherwise than todecline them.”“I am not now to learn,” replied Mr. Collins, with a formal wave of thehand, “that it is usual with young ladies to reject the addresses of theman whom they secretly mean to accept, when he first applies for theirfavour; and that sometimes the refusal is repeated a second, or even athird time. I am therefore by no means discouraged by what you have justsaid, and shall hope to lead you to the altar ere long.”“Upon my word, sir,” cried Elizabeth, “your hope is a ratherextraordinary one after my declaration. I do assure you that I am notone of those young ladies (if such young ladies there are) who are sodaring as to risk their happiness on the chance of being asked a secondtime. I am perfectly serious in my refusal. You could not make _me_happy, and I am convinced that I am the last woman in the world whocould make you so. Nay, were your friend Lady Catherine to know me, Iam persuaded she would find me in every respect ill qualified for thesituation.”“Were it certain that Lady Catherine would think so,” said Mr. Collinsvery gravely--“but I cannot imagine that her ladyship would at alldisapprove of you. And you may be certain when I have the honour ofseeing her again, I shall speak in the very highest terms of yourmodesty, economy, and other amiable qualification.”“Indeed, Mr. Collins, all praise of me will be unnecessary. Youmust give me leave to judge for myself, and pay me the complimentof believing what I say. I wish you very happy and very rich, and byrefusing your hand, do all in my power to prevent your being otherwise.In making me the offer, you must have satisfied the delicacy of yourfeelings with regard to my family, and may take possession of Longbournestate whenever it falls, without any self-reproach. This matter maybe considered, therefore, as finally settled.” And rising as shethus spoke, she would have quitted the room, had Mr. Collins not thusaddressed her:“When I do myself the honour of speaking to you next on the subject, Ishall hope to receive a more favourable answer than you have now givenme; though I am far from accusing you of cruelty at present, because Iknow it to be the established custom of your sex to reject a man onthe first application, and perhaps you have even now said as much toencourage my suit as would be consistent with the true delicacy of thefemale character.”“Really, Mr. Collins,” cried Elizabeth with some warmth, “you puzzle meexceedingly. If what I have hitherto said can appear to you in the formof encouragement, I know not how to express my refusal in such a way asto convince you of its being one.”“You must give me leave to flatter myself, my dear cousin, that yourrefusal of my addresses is merely words of course. My reasons forbelieving it are briefly these: It does not appear to me that my hand isunworthy of your acceptance, or that the establishment I can offer wouldbe any other than highly desirable. My situation in life, my connectionswith the family of de Bourgh, and my relationship to your own, arecircumstances highly in my favour; and you should take it into furtherconsideration, that in spite of your manifold attractions, it is by nomeans certain that another offer of marriage may ever be made you. Yourportion is unhappily so small that it will in all likelihood undothe effects of your loveliness and amiable qualifications. As I musttherefore conclude that you are not serious in your rejection of me,I shall choose to attribute it to your wish of increasing my love bysuspense, according to the usual practice of elegant females.”“I do assure you, sir, that I have no pretensions whatever to that kindof elegance which consists in tormenting a respectable man. I wouldrather be paid the compliment of being believed sincere. I thank youagain and again for the honour you have done me in your proposals, butto accept them is absolutely impossible. My feelings in every respectforbid it. Can I speak plainer? Do not consider me now as an elegantfemale, intending to plague you, but as a rational creature, speakingthe truth from her heart.”“You are uniformly charming!” cried he, with an air of awkwardgallantry; “and I am persuaded that when sanctioned by the expressauthority of both your excellent parents, my proposals will not fail ofbeing acceptable.”To such perseverance in wilful self-deception Elizabeth would makeno reply, and immediately and in silence withdrew; determined, ifhe persisted in considering her repeated refusals as flatteringencouragement, to apply to her father, whose negative might be utteredin such a manner as to be decisive, and whose behaviour at least couldnot be mistaken for the affectation and coquetry of an elegant female.Chapter 20Mr. Collins was not left long to the silent contemplation of hissuccessful love; for Mrs. Bennet, having dawdled about in the vestibuleto watch for the end of the conference, no sooner saw Elizabeth openthe door and with quick step pass her towards the staircase, than sheentered the breakfast-room, and congratulated both him and herself inwarm terms on the happy prospect of their nearer connection. Mr. Collinsreceived and returned these felicitations with equal pleasure, and thenproceeded to relate the particulars of their interview, with the resultof which he trusted he had every reason to be satisfied, since therefusal which his cousin had steadfastly given him would naturally flowfrom her bashful modesty and the genuine delicacy of her character.This information, however, startled Mrs. Bennet; she would have beenglad to be equally satisfied that her daughter had meant to encouragehim by protesting against his proposals, but she dared not believe it,and could not help saying so.“But, depend upon it, Mr. Collins,” she added, “that Lizzy shall bebrought to reason. I will speak to her about it directly. She is a veryheadstrong, foolish girl, and does not know her own interest but I will_make_ her know it.”“Pardon me for interrupting you, madam,” cried Mr. Collins; “but ifshe is really headstrong and foolish, I know not whether she wouldaltogether be a very desirable wife to a man in my situation, whonaturally looks for happiness in the marriage state. If therefore sheactually persists in rejecting my suit, perhaps it were better notto force her into accepting me, because if liable to such defects oftemper, she could not contribute much to my felicity.”“Sir, you quite misunderstand me,” said Mrs. Bennet, alarmed. “Lizzy isonly headstrong in such matters as these. In everything else she is asgood-natured a girl as ever lived. I will go directly to Mr. Bennet, andwe shall very soon settle it with her, I am sure.”She would not give him time to reply, but hurrying instantly to herhusband, called out as she entered the library, “Oh! Mr. Bennet, youare wanted immediately; we are all in an uproar. You must come and makeLizzy marry Mr. Collins, for she vows she will not have him, and if youdo not make haste he will change his mind and not have _her_.”Mr. Bennet raised his eyes from his book as she entered, and fixed themon her face with a calm unconcern which was not in the least altered byher communication.“I have not the pleasure of understanding you,” said he, when she hadfinished her speech. “Of what are you talking?”“Of Mr. Collins and Lizzy. Lizzy declares she will not have Mr. Collins,and Mr. Collins begins to say that he will not have Lizzy.”“And what am I to do on the occasion? It seems an hopeless business.”“Speak to Lizzy about it yourself. Tell her that you insist upon hermarrying him.”“Let her be called down. She shall hear my opinion.”Mrs. Bennet rang the bell, and Miss Elizabeth was summoned to thelibrary.“Come here, child,” cried her father as she appeared. “I have sent foryou on an affair of importance. I understand that Mr. Collins has madeyou an offer of marriage. Is it true?” Elizabeth replied that it was.“Very well--and this offer of marriage you have refused?”“I have, sir.”“Very well. We now come to the point. Your mother insists upon youraccepting it. Is it not so, Mrs. Bennet?”“Yes, or I will never see her again.”“An unhappy alternative is before you, Elizabeth. From this day you mustbe a stranger to one of your parents. Your mother will never see youagain if you do _not_ marry Mr. Collins, and I will never see you againif you _do_.”Elizabeth could not but smile at such a conclusion of such a beginning,but Mrs. Bennet, who had persuaded herself that her husband regarded theaffair as she wished, was excessively disappointed.“What do you mean, Mr. Bennet, in talking this way? You promised me to_insist_ upon her marrying him.”“My dear,” replied her husband, “I have two small favours to request.First, that you will allow me the free use of my understanding on thepresent occasion; and secondly, of my room. I shall be glad to have thelibrary to myself as soon as may be.”Not yet, however, in spite of her disappointment in her husband, didMrs. Bennet give up the point. She talked to Elizabeth again and again;coaxed and threatened her by turns. She endeavoured to secure Janein her interest; but Jane, with all possible mildness, declinedinterfering; and Elizabeth, sometimes with real earnestness, andsometimes with playful gaiety, replied to her attacks. Though her mannervaried, however, her determination never did.Mr. Collins, meanwhile, was meditating in solitude on what had passed.He thought too well of himself to comprehend on what motives his cousincould refuse him; and though his pride was hurt, he suffered in no otherway. His regard for her was quite imaginary; and the possibility of herdeserving her mother’s reproach prevented his feeling any regret.While the family were in this confusion, Charlotte Lucas came to spendthe day with them. She was met in the vestibule by Lydia, who, flying toher, cried in a half whisper, “I am glad you are come, for there is suchfun here! What do you think has happened this morning? Mr. Collins hasmade an offer to Lizzy, and she will not have him.”Charlotte hardly had time to answer, before they were joined by Kitty,who came to tell the same news; and no sooner had they entered thebreakfast-room, where Mrs. Bennet was alone, than she likewise began onthe subject, calling on Miss Lucas for her compassion, and entreatingher to persuade her friend Lizzy to comply with the wishes of all herfamily. “Pray do, my dear Miss Lucas,” she added in a melancholy tone,“for nobody is on my side, nobody takes part with me. I am cruelly used,nobody feels for my poor nerves.”Charlotte’s reply was spared by the entrance of Jane and Elizabeth.“Aye, there she comes,” continued Mrs. Bennet, “looking as unconcernedas may be, and caring no more for us than if we were at York, providedshe can have her own way. But I tell you, Miss Lizzy--if you take itinto your head to go on refusing every offer of marriage in this way,you will never get a husband at all--and I am sure I do not know who isto maintain you when your father is dead. I shall not be able to keepyou--and so I warn you. I have done with you from this very day. I toldyou in the library, you know, that I should never speak to you again,and you will find me as good as my word. I have no pleasure in talkingto undutiful children. Not that I have much pleasure, indeed, in talkingto anybody. People who suffer as I do from nervous complaints can haveno great inclination for talking. Nobody can tell what I suffer! But itis always so. Those who do not complain are never pitied.”Her daughters listened in silence to this effusion, sensible thatany attempt to reason with her or soothe her would only increase theirritation. She talked on, therefore, without interruption from any ofthem, till they were joined by Mr. Collins, who entered the room withan air more stately than usual, and on perceiving whom, she said tothe girls, “Now, I do insist upon it, that you, all of you, holdyour tongues, and let me and Mr. Collins have a little conversationtogether.”Elizabeth passed quietly out of the room, Jane and Kitty followed, butLydia stood her ground, determined to hear all she could; and Charlotte,detained first by the civility of Mr. Collins, whose inquiries afterherself and all her family were very minute, and then by a littlecuriosity, satisfied herself with walking to the window and pretendingnot to hear. In a doleful voice Mrs. Bennet began the projectedconversation: “Oh! Mr. Collins!”“My dear madam,” replied he, “let us be for ever silent on this point.Far be it from me,” he presently continued, in a voice that marked hisdispleasure, “to resent the behaviour of your daughter. Resignationto inevitable evils is the duty of us all; the peculiar duty of ayoung man who has been so fortunate as I have been in early preferment;and I trust I am resigned. Perhaps not the less so from feeling a doubtof my positive happiness had my fair cousin honoured me with her hand;for I have often observed that resignation is never so perfect aswhen the blessing denied begins to lose somewhat of its value in ourestimation. You will not, I hope, consider me as showing any disrespectto your family, my dear madam, by thus withdrawing my pretensions toyour daughter’s favour, without having paid yourself and Mr. Bennet thecompliment of requesting you to interpose your authority in mybehalf. My conduct may, I fear, be objectionable in having accepted mydismission from your daughter’s lips instead of your own. But we are allliable to error. I have certainly meant well through the whole affair.My object has been to secure an amiable companion for myself, with dueconsideration for the advantage of all your family, and if my _manner_has been at all reprehensible, I here beg leave to apologise.”Chapter 21The discussion of Mr. Collins’s offer was now nearly at an end, andElizabeth had only to suffer from the uncomfortable feelings necessarilyattending it, and occasionally from some peevish allusions of hermother. As for the gentleman himself, _his_ feelings were chieflyexpressed, not by embarrassment or dejection, or by trying to avoid her,but by stiffness of manner and resentful silence. He scarcely ever spoketo her, and the assiduous attentions which he had been so sensible ofhimself were transferred for the rest of the day to Miss Lucas, whosecivility in listening to him was a seasonable relief to them all, andespecially to her friend.The morrow produced no abatement of Mrs. Bennet’s ill-humour or illhealth. Mr. Collins was also in the same state of angry pride. Elizabethhad hoped that his resentment might shorten his visit, but his plan didnot appear in the least affected by it. He was always to have gone onSaturday, and to Saturday he meant to stay.After breakfast, the girls walked to Meryton to inquire if Mr. Wickhamwere returned, and to lament over his absence from the Netherfield ball.He joined them on their entering the town, and attended them to theiraunt’s where his regret and vexation, and the concern of everybody, waswell talked over. To Elizabeth, however, he voluntarily acknowledgedthat the necessity of his absence _had_ been self-imposed.“I found,” said he, “as the time drew near that I had better not meetMr. Darcy; that to be in the same room, the same party with him for somany hours together, might be more than I could bear, and that scenesmight arise unpleasant to more than myself.”She highly approved his forbearance, and they had leisure for a fulldiscussion of it, and for all the commendation which they civillybestowed on each other, as Wickham and another officer walked back withthem to Longbourn, and during the walk he particularly attended toher. His accompanying them was a double advantage; she felt all thecompliment it offered to herself, and it was most acceptable as anoccasion of introducing him to her father and mother.Soon after their return, a letter was delivered to Miss Bennet; it camefrom Netherfield. The envelope contained a sheet of elegant, little,hot-pressed paper, well covered with a lady’s fair, flowing hand; andElizabeth saw her sister’s countenance change as she read it, and sawher dwelling intently on some particular passages. Jane recollectedherself soon, and putting the letter away, tried to join with her usualcheerfulness in the general conversation; but Elizabeth felt an anxietyon the subject which drew off her attention even from Wickham; and nosooner had he and his companion taken leave, than a glance from Janeinvited her to follow her up stairs. When they had gained their own room,Jane, taking out the letter, said:“This is from Caroline Bingley; what it contains has surprised me a gooddeal. The whole party have left Netherfield by this time, and are ontheir way to town--and without any intention of coming back again. Youshall hear what she says.”She then read the first sentence aloud, which comprised the informationof their having just resolved to follow their brother to town directly,and of their meaning to dine in Grosvenor Street, where Mr. Hurst had ahouse. The next was in these words: “I do not pretend to regret anythingI shall leave in Hertfordshire, except your society, my dearest friend;but we will hope, at some future period, to enjoy many returns of thatdelightful intercourse we have known, and in the meanwhile maylessen the pain of separation by a very frequent and most unreservedcorrespondence. I depend on you for that.” To these highflownexpressions Elizabeth listened with all the insensibility of distrust;and though the suddenness of their removal surprised her, she sawnothing in it really to lament; it was not to be supposed that theirabsence from Netherfield would prevent Mr. Bingley’s being there; and asto the loss of their society, she was persuaded that Jane must cease toregard it, in the enjoyment of his.“It is unlucky,” said she, after a short pause, “that you should not beable to see your friends before they leave the country. But may we nothope that the period of future happiness to which Miss Bingley looksforward may arrive earlier than she is aware, and that the delightfulintercourse you have known as friends will be renewed with yet greatersatisfaction as sisters? Mr. Bingley will not be detained in London bythem.”“Caroline decidedly says that none of the party will return intoHertfordshire this winter. I will read it to you:”“When my brother left us yesterday, he imagined that the business whichtook him to London might be concluded in three or four days; but as weare certain it cannot be so, and at the same time convinced that whenCharles gets to town he will be in no hurry to leave it again, we havedetermined on following him thither, that he may not be obliged to spendhis vacant hours in a comfortless hotel. Many of my acquaintances arealready there for the winter; I wish that I could hear that you, mydearest friend, had any intention of making one of the crowd--but ofthat I despair. I sincerely hope your Christmas in Hertfordshire mayabound in the gaieties which that season generally brings, and that yourbeaux will be so numerous as to prevent your feeling the loss of thethree of whom we shall deprive you.”“It is evident by this,” added Jane, “that he comes back no more thiswinter.”“It is only evident that Miss Bingley does not mean that he _should_.”“Why will you think so? It must be his own doing. He is his ownmaster. But you do not know _all_. I _will_ read you the passage whichparticularly hurts me. I will have no reserves from _you_.”“Mr. Darcy is impatient to see his sister; and, to confess the truth,_we_ are scarcely less eager to meet her again. I really do not thinkGeorgiana Darcy has her equal for beauty, elegance, and accomplishments;and the affection she inspires in Louisa and myself is heightened intosomething still more interesting, from the hope we dare entertain ofher being hereafter our sister. I do not know whether I ever beforementioned to you my feelings on this subject; but I will not leave thecountry without confiding them, and I trust you will not esteem themunreasonable. My brother admires her greatly already; he will havefrequent opportunity now of seeing her on the most intimate footing;her relations all wish the connection as much as his own; and a sister’spartiality is not misleading me, I think, when I call Charles mostcapable of engaging any woman’s heart. With all these circumstances tofavour an attachment, and nothing to prevent it, am I wrong, my dearestJane, in indulging the hope of an event which will secure the happinessof so many?”“What do you think of _this_ sentence, my dear Lizzy?” said Jane as shefinished it. “Is it not clear enough? Does it not expressly declare thatCaroline neither expects nor wishes me to be her sister; that she isperfectly convinced of her brother’s indifference; and that if shesuspects the nature of my feelings for him, she means (most kindly!) toput me on my guard? Can there be any other opinion on the subject?”“Yes, there can; for mine is totally different. Will you hear it?”“Most willingly.”“You shall have it in a few words. Miss Bingley sees that her brother isin love with you, and wants him to marry Miss Darcy. She follows himto town in hope of keeping him there, and tries to persuade you that hedoes not care about you.”Jane shook her head.“Indeed, Jane, you ought to believe me. No one who has ever seen youtogether can doubt his affection. Miss Bingley, I am sure, cannot. Sheis not such a simpleton. Could she have seen half as much love in Mr.Darcy for herself, she would have ordered her wedding clothes. But thecase is this: We are not rich enough or grand enough for them; and sheis the more anxious to get Miss Darcy for her brother, from the notionthat when there has been _one_ intermarriage, she may have less troublein achieving a second; in which there is certainly some ingenuity, andI dare say it would succeed, if Miss de Bourgh were out of the way. But,my dearest Jane, you cannot seriously imagine that because Miss Bingleytells you her brother greatly admires Miss Darcy, he is in the smallestdegree less sensible of _your_ merit than when he took leave of you onTuesday, or that it will be in her power to persuade him that, insteadof being in love with you, he is very much in love with her friend.”“If we thought alike of Miss Bingley,” replied Jane, “yourrepresentation of all this might make me quite easy. But I know thefoundation is unjust. Caroline is incapable of wilfully deceivinganyone; and all that I can hope in this case is that she is deceivingherself.”“That is right. You could not have started a more happy idea, since youwill not take comfort in mine. Believe her to be deceived, by all means.You have now done your duty by her, and must fret no longer.”“But, my dear sister, can I be happy, even supposing the best, inaccepting a man whose sisters and friends are all wishing him to marryelsewhere?”“You must decide for yourself,” said Elizabeth; “and if, upon maturedeliberation, you find that the misery of disobliging his two sisters ismore than equivalent to the happiness of being his wife, I advise you byall means to refuse him.”“How can you talk so?” said Jane, faintly smiling. “You must know thatthough I should be exceedingly grieved at their disapprobation, I couldnot hesitate.”“I did not think you would; and that being the case, I cannot consideryour situation with much compassion.”“But if he returns no more this winter, my choice will never berequired. A thousand things may arise in six months!”The idea of his returning no more Elizabeth treated with the utmostcontempt. It appeared to her merely the suggestion of Caroline’sinterested wishes, and she could not for a moment suppose that thosewishes, however openly or artfully spoken, could influence a young manso totally independent of everyone.She represented to her sister as forcibly as possible what she felton the subject, and had soon the pleasure of seeing its happy effect.Jane’s temper was not desponding, and she was gradually led to hope,though the diffidence of affection sometimes overcame the hope, thatBingley would return to Netherfield and answer every wish of her heart.They agreed that Mrs. Bennet should only hear of the departure of thefamily, without being alarmed on the score of the gentleman’s conduct;but even this partial communication gave her a great deal of concern,and she bewailed it as exceedingly unlucky that the ladies should happento go away just as they were all getting so intimate together. Afterlamenting it, however, at some length, she had the consolation that Mr.Bingley would be soon down again and soon dining at Longbourn, and theconclusion of all was the comfortable declaration, that though he hadbeen invited only to a family dinner, she would take care to have twofull courses.Chapter 22The Bennets were engaged to dine with the Lucases and again during thechief of the day was Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to Mr. Collins.Elizabeth took an opportunity of thanking her. “It keeps him in goodhumour,” said she, “and I am more obliged to you than I can express.” Charlotte assured her friend of her satisfaction in being useful, andthat it amply repaid her for the little sacrifice of her time. This wasvery amiable, but Charlotte’s kindness extended farther than Elizabethhad any conception of; its object was nothing else than to secure herfrom any return of Mr. Collins’s addresses, by engaging them towardsherself. Such was Miss Lucas’s scheme; and appearances were sofavourable, that when they parted at night, she would have felt almostsecure of success if he had not been to leave Hertfordshire so verysoon. But here she did injustice to the fire and independence of hischaracter, for it led him to escape out of Longbourn House the nextmorning with admirable slyness, and hasten to Lucas Lodge to throwhimself at her feet. He was anxious to avoid the notice of his cousins,from a conviction that if they saw him depart, they could not fail toconjecture his design, and he was not willing to have the attempt knowntill its success might be known likewise; for though feeling almostsecure, and with reason, for Charlotte had been tolerably encouraging,he was comparatively diffident since the adventure of Wednesday.His reception, however, was of the most flattering kind. Miss Lucasperceived him from an upper window as he walked towards the house, andinstantly set out to meet him accidentally in the lane. But little hadshe dared to hope that so much love and eloquence awaited her there.In as short a time as Mr. Collins’s long speeches would allow,everything was settled between them to the satisfaction of both; and asthey entered the house he earnestly entreated her to name the day thatwas to make him the happiest of men; and though such a solicitation mustbe waived for the present, the lady felt no inclination to trifle withhis happiness. The stupidity with which he was favoured by nature mustguard his courtship from any charm that could make a woman wish for itscontinuance; and Miss Lucas, who accepted him solely from the pureand disinterested desire of an establishment, cared not how soon thatestablishment were gained.Sir William and Lady Lucas were speedily applied to for their consent;and it was bestowed with a most joyful alacrity. Mr. Collins’s presentcircumstances made it a most eligible match for their daughter, to whomthey could give little fortune; and his prospects of future wealth wereexceedingly fair. Lady Lucas began directly to calculate, with moreinterest than the matter had ever excited before, how many years longerMr. Bennet was likely to live; and Sir William gave it as his decidedopinion, that whenever Mr. Collins should be in possession of theLongbourn estate, it would be highly expedient that both he and his wifeshould make their appearance at St. James’s. The whole family, in short,were properly overjoyed on the occasion. The younger girls formed hopesof _coming out_ a year or two sooner than they might otherwise havedone; and the boys were relieved from their apprehension of Charlotte’sdying an old maid. Charlotte herself was tolerably composed. She hadgained her point, and had time to consider of it. Her reflections werein general satisfactory. Mr. Collins, to be sure, was neither sensiblenor agreeable; his society was irksome, and his attachment to her mustbe imaginary. But still he would be her husband. Without thinking highlyeither of men or matrimony, marriage had always been her object; it wasthe only provision for well-educated young women of small fortune,and however uncertain of giving happiness, must be their pleasantestpreservative from want. This preservative she had now obtained; and atthe age of twenty-seven, without having ever been handsome, she felt allthe good luck of it. The least agreeable circumstance in the businesswas the surprise it must occasion to Elizabeth Bennet, whose friendshipshe valued beyond that of any other person. Elizabeth would wonder,and probably would blame her; and though her resolution was not to beshaken, her feelings must be hurt by such a disapprobation. She resolvedto give her the information herself, and therefore charged Mr. Collins,when he returned to Longbourn to dinner, to drop no hint of what hadpassed before any of the family. A promise of secrecy was of course verydutifully given, but it could not be kept without difficulty; for thecuriosity excited by his long absence burst forth in such very directquestions on his return as required some ingenuity to evade, and he wasat the same time exercising great self-denial, for he was longing topublish his prosperous love.As he was to begin his journey too early on the morrow to see any of thefamily, the ceremony of leave-taking was performed when the ladies movedfor the night; and Mrs. Bennet, with great politeness and cordiality,said how happy they should be to see him at Longbourn again, wheneverhis engagements might allow him to visit them.“My dear madam,” he replied, “this invitation is particularlygratifying, because it is what I have been hoping to receive; andyou may be very certain that I shall avail myself of it as soon aspossible.”They were all astonished; and Mr. Bennet, who could by no means wish forso speedy a return, immediately said:“But is there not danger of Lady Catherine’s disapprobation here, mygood sir? You had better neglect your relations than run the risk ofoffending your patroness.”“My dear sir,” replied Mr. Collins, “I am particularly obliged to youfor this friendly caution, and you may depend upon my not taking somaterial a step without her ladyship’s concurrence.”“You cannot be too much upon your guard. Risk anything rather than herdispleasure; and if you find it likely to be raised by your coming to usagain, which I should think exceedingly probable, stay quietly at home,and be satisfied that _we_ shall take no offence.”“Believe me, my dear sir, my gratitude is warmly excited by suchaffectionate attention; and depend upon it, you will speedily receivefrom me a letter of thanks for this, and for every other mark of yourregard during my stay in Hertfordshire. As for my fair cousins, thoughmy absence may not be long enough to render it necessary, I shall nowtake the liberty of wishing them health and happiness, not excepting mycousin Elizabeth.”With proper civilities the ladies then withdrew; all of them equallysurprised that he meditated a quick return. Mrs. Bennet wished tounderstand by it that he thought of paying his addresses to one of heryounger girls, and Mary might have been prevailed on to accept him.She rated his abilities much higher than any of the others; there wasa solidity in his reflections which often struck her, and though by nomeans so clever as herself, she thought that if encouraged to readand improve himself by such an example as hers, he might become a veryagreeable companion. But on the following morning, every hope of thiskind was done away. Miss Lucas called soon after breakfast, and in aprivate conference with Elizabeth related the event of the day before.The possibility of Mr. Collins’s fancying himself in love with herfriend had once occurred to Elizabeth within the last day or two; butthat Charlotte could encourage him seemed almost as far frompossibility as she could encourage him herself, and her astonishment wasconsequently so great as to overcome at first the bounds of decorum, andshe could not help crying out:“Engaged to Mr. Collins! My dear Charlotte--impossible!”The steady countenance which Miss Lucas had commanded in telling herstory, gave way to a momentary confusion here on receiving so direct areproach; though, as it was no more than she expected, she soon regainedher composure, and calmly replied:“Why should you be surprised, my dear Eliza? Do you think it incrediblethat Mr. Collins should be able to procure any woman’s good opinion,because he was not so happy as to succeed with you?”But Elizabeth had now recollected herself, and making a strong effortfor it, was able to assure with tolerable firmness that the prospect oftheir relationship was highly grateful to her, and that she wished herall imaginable happiness.“I see what you are feeling,” replied Charlotte. “You must be surprised,very much surprised--so lately as Mr. Collins was wishing to marryyou. But when you have had time to think it over, I hope you will besatisfied with what I have done. I am not romantic, you know; I neverwas. I ask only a comfortable home; and considering Mr. Collins’scharacter, connection, and situation in life, I am convinced that mychance of happiness with him is as fair as most people can boast onentering the marriage state.”Elizabeth quietly answered “Undoubtedly;” and after an awkward pause,they returned to the rest of the family. Charlotte did not stay muchlonger, and Elizabeth was then left to reflect on what she had heard.It was a long time before she became at all reconciled to the idea of sounsuitable a match. The strangeness of Mr. Collins’s making two offersof marriage within three days was nothing in comparison of his being nowaccepted. She had always felt that Charlotte’s opinion of matrimony wasnot exactly like her own, but she had not supposed it to be possiblethat, when called into action, she would have sacrificed every betterfeeling to worldly advantage. Charlotte the wife of Mr. Collins was amost humiliating picture! And to the pang of a friend disgracing herselfand sunk in her esteem, was added the distressing conviction that itwas impossible for that friend to be tolerably happy in the lot she hadchosen.Elizabeth was sitting with her mother and sisters, reflecting on whatshe had heard, and doubting whether she was authorised to mentionit, when Sir William Lucas himself appeared, sent by his daughter, toannounce her engagement to the family. With many compliments to them,and much self-gratulation on the prospect of a connection between thehouses, he unfolded the matter--to an audience not merely wondering, butincredulous; for Mrs. Bennet, with more perseverance than politeness,protested he must be entirely mistaken; and Lydia, always unguarded andoften uncivil, boisterously exclaimed:“Good Lord! Sir William, how can you tell such a story? Do not you knowthat Mr. Collins wants to marry Lizzy?”Nothing less than the complaisance of a courtier could have bornewithout anger such treatment; but Sir William’s good breeding carriedhim through it all; and though he begged leave to be positive as to thetruth of his information, he listened to all their impertinence with themost forbearing courtesy.Elizabeth, feeling it incumbent on her to relieve him from so unpleasanta situation, now put herself forward to confirm his account, bymentioning her prior knowledge of it from Charlotte herself; andendeavoured to put a stop to the exclamations of her mother and sistersby the earnestness of her congratulations to Sir William, in which shewas readily joined by Jane, and by making a variety of remarks on thehappiness that might be expected from the match, the excellent characterof Mr. Collins, and the convenient distance of Hunsford from London.Mrs. Bennet was in fact too much overpowered to say a great deal whileSir William remained; but no sooner had he left them than her feelingsfound a rapid vent. In the first place, she persisted in disbelievingthe whole of the matter; secondly, she was very sure that Mr. Collinshad been taken in; thirdly, she trusted that they would never behappy together; and fourthly, that the match might be broken off. Twoinferences, however, were plainly deduced from the whole: one, thatElizabeth was the real cause of the mischief; and the other 