Mr. Bennet’s emotions were much more tranquil on the occasion, and suchas he did experience he pronounced to be of a most agreeable sort; forit gratified him, he said, to discover that Charlotte Lucas, whom he hadbeen used to think tolerably sensible, was as foolish as his wife, andmore foolish than his daughter!Jane confessed herself a little surprised at the match; but she saidless of her astonishment than of her earnest desire for their happiness;nor could Elizabeth persuade her to consider it as improbable. Kittyand Lydia were far from envying Miss Lucas, for Mr. Collins was only aclergyman; and it affected them in no other way than as a piece of newsto spread at Meryton.Lady Lucas could not be insensible of triumph on being able to retorton Mrs. Bennet the comfort of having a daughter well married; and shecalled at Longbourn rather oftener than usual to say how happy she was,though Mrs. Bennet’s sour looks and ill-natured remarks might have beenenough to drive happiness away.Between Elizabeth and Charlotte there was a restraint which kept themmutually silent on the subject; and Elizabeth felt persuaded thatno real confidence could ever subsist between them again. Herdisappointment in Charlotte made her turn with fonder regard to hersister, of whose rectitude and delicacy she was sure her opinion couldnever be shaken, and for whose happiness she grew daily more anxious,as Bingley had now been gone a week and nothing more was heard of hisreturn.Jane had sent Caroline an early answer to her letter, and was countingthe days till she might reasonably hope to hear again. The promisedletter of thanks from Mr. Collins arrived on Tuesday, addressed totheir father, and written with all the solemnity of gratitude which atwelvemonth’s abode in the family might have prompted. After discharginghis conscience on that head, he proceeded to inform them, with manyrapturous expressions, of his happiness in having obtained the affectionof their amiable neighbour, Miss Lucas, and then explained that it wasmerely with the view of enjoying her society that he had been so readyto close with their kind wish of seeing him again at Longbourn, whitherhe hoped to be able to return on Monday fortnight; for Lady Catherine,he added, so heartily approved his marriage, that she wished it to takeplace as soon as possible, which he trusted would be an unanswerableargument with his amiable Charlotte to name an early day for making himthe happiest of men.Mr. Collins’s return into Hertfordshire was no longer a matter ofpleasure to Mrs. Bennet. On the contrary, she was as much disposed tocomplain of it as her husband. It was very strange that he should cometo Longbourn instead of to Lucas Lodge; it was also very inconvenientand exceedingly troublesome. She hated having visitors in the housewhile her health was so indifferent, and lovers were of all people themost disagreeable. Such were the gentle murmurs of Mrs. Bennet, andthey gave way only to the greater distress of Mr. Bingley’s continuedabsence.Neither Jane nor Elizabeth were comfortable on this subject. Day afterday passed away without bringing any other tidings of him than thereport which shortly prevailed in Meryton of his coming no more toNetherfield the whole winter; a report which highly incensed Mrs.Bennet, and which she never failed to contradict as a most scandalousfalsehood.Even Elizabeth began to fear--not that Bingley was indifferent--but thathis sisters would be successful in keeping him away. Unwilling asshe was to admit an idea so destructive of Jane’s happiness, and sodishonorable to the stability of her lover, she could not prevent itsfrequently occurring. The united efforts of his two unfeeling sistersand of his overpowering friend, assisted by the attractions of MissDarcy and the amusements of London might be too much, she feared, forthe strength of his attachment.As for Jane, _her_ anxiety under this suspense was, of course, morepainful than Elizabeth’s, but whatever she felt she was desirous ofconcealing, and between herself and Elizabeth, therefore, the subjectwas never alluded to. But as no such delicacy restrained her mother,an hour seldom passed in which she did not talk of Bingley, express herimpatience for his arrival, or even require Jane to confess that if hedid not come back she would think herself very ill used. It neededall Jane’s steady mildness to bear these attacks with tolerabletranquillity.Mr. Collins returned most punctually on Monday fortnight, but hisreception at Longbourn was not quite so gracious as it had been on hisfirst introduction. He was too happy, however, to need much attention;and luckily for the others, the business of love-making relieved themfrom a great deal of his company. The chief of every day was spent byhim at Lucas Lodge, and he sometimes returned to Longbourn only in timeto make an apology for his absence before the family went to bed.Mrs. Bennet was really in a most pitiable state. The very mention ofanything concerning the match threw her into an agony of ill-humour,and wherever she went she was sure of hearing it talked of. The sightof Miss Lucas was odious to her. As her successor in that house, sheregarded her with jealous abhorrence. Whenever Charlotte came to seethem, she concluded her to be anticipating the hour of possession; andwhenever she spoke in a low voice to Mr. Collins, was convinced thatthey were talking of the Longbourn estate, and resolving to turn herselfand her daughters out of the house, as soon as Mr. Bennet were dead. Shecomplained bitterly of all this to her husband.“Indeed, Mr. Bennet,” said she, “it is very hard to think that CharlotteLucas should ever be mistress of this house, that I should be forced tomake way for _her_, and live to see her take her place in it!”“My dear, do not give way to such gloomy thoughts. Let us hope forbetter things. Let us flatter ourselves that I may be the survivor.”This was not very consoling to Mrs. Bennet, and therefore, instead ofmaking any answer, she went on as before.“I cannot bear to think that they should have all this estate. If it wasnot for the entail, I should not mind it.”“What should not you mind?”“I should not mind anything at all.”“Let us be thankful that you are preserved from a state of suchinsensibility.”“I never can be thankful, Mr. Bennet, for anything about the entail. Howanyone could have the conscience to entail away an estate from one’s owndaughters, I cannot understand; and all for the sake of Mr. Collins too!Why should _he_ have it more than anybody else?”“I leave it to yourself to determine,” said Mr. Bennet.Chapter 24Miss Bingley’s letter arrived, and put an end to doubt. The very firstsentence conveyed the assurance of their being all settled in London forthe winter, and concluded with her brother’s regret at not having hadtime to pay his respects to his friends in Hertfordshire before he leftthe country.Hope was over, entirely over; and when Jane could attend to the restof the letter, she found little, except the professed affection of thewriter, that could give her any comfort. Miss Darcy’s praise occupiedthe chief of it. Her many attractions were again dwelt on, and Carolineboasted joyfully of their increasing intimacy, and ventured to predictthe accomplishment of the wishes which had been unfolded in her formerletter. She wrote also with great pleasure of her brother’s being aninmate of Mr. Darcy’s house, and mentioned with raptures some plans ofthe latter with regard to new furniture.Elizabeth, to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this,heard it in silent indignation. Her heart was divided between concernfor her sister, and resentment against all others. To Caroline’sassertion of her brother’s being partial to Miss Darcy she paid nocredit. That he was really fond of Jane, she doubted no more than shehad ever done; and much as she had always been disposed to like him, shecould not think without anger, hardly without contempt, on that easinessof temper, that want of proper resolution, which now made him the slaveof his designing friends, and led him to sacrifice of his own happinessto the caprice of their inclination. Had his own happiness, however,been the only sacrifice, he might have been allowed to sport with it inwhatever manner he thought best, but her sister’s was involved in it, asshe thought he must be sensible himself. It was a subject, in short,on which reflection would be long indulged, and must be unavailing. Shecould think of nothing else; and yet whether Bingley’s regard had reallydied away, or were suppressed by his friends’ interference; whetherhe had been aware of Jane’s attachment, or whether it had escaped hisobservation; whatever were the case, though her opinion of him must bematerially affected by the difference, her sister’s situation remainedthe same, her peace equally wounded.A day or two passed before Jane had courage to speak of her feelings toElizabeth; but at last, on Mrs. Bennet’s leaving them together, after alonger irritation than usual about Netherfield and its master, she couldnot help saying:“Oh, that my dear mother had more command over herself! She can have noidea of the pain she gives me by her continual reflections on him. ButI will not repine. It cannot last long. He will be forgot, and we shallall be as we were before.”Elizabeth looked at her sister with incredulous solicitude, but saidnothing.“You doubt me,” cried Jane, slightly colouring; “indeed, you haveno reason. He may live in my memory as the most amiable man of myacquaintance, but that is all. I have nothing either to hope or fear,and nothing to reproach him with. Thank God! I have not _that_ pain. Alittle time, therefore--I shall certainly try to get the better.”With a stronger voice she soon added, “I have this comfort immediately,that it has not been more than an error of fancy on my side, and that ithas done no harm to anyone but myself.”“My dear Jane!” exclaimed Elizabeth, “you are too good. Your sweetnessand disinterestedness are really angelic; I do not know what to sayto you. I feel as if I had never done you justice, or loved you as youdeserve.”Miss Bennet eagerly disclaimed all extraordinary merit, and threw backthe praise on her sister’s warm affection.“Nay,” said Elizabeth, “this is not fair. _You_ wish to think all theworld respectable, and are hurt if I speak ill of anybody. I only wantto think _you_ perfect, and you set yourself against it. Do notbe afraid of my running into any excess, of my encroaching on yourprivilege of universal good-will. You need not. There are few peoplewhom I really love, and still fewer of whom I think well. The more I seeof the world, the more am I dissatisfied with it; and every day confirmsmy belief of the inconsistency of all human characters, and of thelittle dependence that can be placed on the appearance of merit orsense. I have met with two instances lately, one I will not mention; theother is Charlotte’s marriage. It is unaccountable! In every view it isunaccountable!”“My dear Lizzy, do not give way to such feelings as these. They willruin your happiness. You do not make allowance enough for differenceof situation and temper. Consider Mr. Collins’s respectability, andCharlotte’s steady, prudent character. Remember that she is one of alarge family; that as to fortune, it is a most eligible match; and beready to believe, for everybody’s sake, that she may feel something likeregard and esteem for our cousin.”“To oblige you, I would try to believe almost anything, but no one elsecould be benefited by such a belief as this; for were I persuaded thatCharlotte had any regard for him, I should only think worse of herunderstanding than I now do of her heart. My dear Jane, Mr. Collins is aconceited, pompous, narrow-minded, silly man; you know he is, as well asI do; and you must feel, as well as I do, that the woman who married himcannot have a proper way of thinking. You shall not defend her, thoughit is Charlotte Lucas. You shall not, for the sake of one individual,change the meaning of principle and integrity, nor endeavour to persuadeyourself or me, that selfishness is prudence, and insensibility ofdanger security for happiness.”“I must think your language too strong in speaking of both,” repliedJane; “and I hope you will be convinced of it by seeing them happytogether. But enough of this. You alluded to something else. Youmentioned _two_ instances. I cannot misunderstand you, but I entreatyou, dear Lizzy, not to pain me by thinking _that person_ to blame, andsaying your opinion of him is sunk. We must not be so ready to fancyourselves intentionally injured. We must not expect a lively young manto be always so guarded and circumspect. It is very often nothing butour own vanity that deceives us. Women fancy admiration means more thanit does.”“And men take care that they should.”“If it is designedly done, they cannot be justified; but I have no ideaof there being so much design in the world as some persons imagine.”“I am far from attributing any part of Mr. Bingley’s conduct to design,” said Elizabeth; “but without scheming to do wrong, or to make othersunhappy, there may be error, and there may be misery. Thoughtlessness,want of attention to other people’s feelings, and want of resolution,will do the business.”“And do you impute it to either of those?”“Yes; to the last. But if I go on, I shall displease you by saying whatI think of persons you esteem. Stop me whilst you can.”“You persist, then, in supposing his sisters influence him?”“Yes, in conjunction with his friend.”“I cannot believe it. Why should they try to influence him? They canonly wish his happiness; and if he is attached to me, no other woman cansecure it.”“Your first position is false. They may wish many things besides hishappiness; they may wish his increase of wealth and consequence; theymay wish him to marry a girl who has all the importance of money, greatconnections, and pride.”“Beyond a doubt, they _do_ wish him to choose Miss Darcy,” replied Jane;“but this may be from better feelings than you are supposing. They haveknown her much longer than they have known me; no wonder if they loveher better. But, whatever may be their own wishes, it is very unlikelythey should have opposed their brother’s. What sister would thinkherself at liberty to do it, unless there were something veryobjectionable? If they believed him attached to me, they would not tryto part us; if he were so, they could not succeed. By supposing such anaffection, you make everybody acting unnaturally and wrong, and me mostunhappy. Do not distress me by the idea. I am not ashamed of having beenmistaken--or, at least, it is light, it is nothing in comparison of whatI should feel in thinking ill of him or his sisters. Let me take it inthe best light, in the light in which it may be understood.”Elizabeth could not oppose such a wish; and from this time Mr. Bingley’sname was scarcely ever mentioned between them.Mrs. Bennet still continued to wonder and repine at his returning nomore, and though a day seldom passed in which Elizabeth did not accountfor it clearly, there was little chance of her ever considering it withless perplexity. Her daughter endeavoured to convince her of what shedid not believe herself, that his attentions to Jane had been merely theeffect of a common and transient liking, which ceased when he saw herno more; but though the probability of the statement was admitted atthe time, she had the same story to repeat every day. Mrs. Bennet’s bestcomfort was that Mr. Bingley must be down again in the summer.Mr. Bennet treated the matter differently. “So, Lizzy,” said he one day,“your sister is crossed in love, I find. I congratulate her. Next tobeing married, a girl likes to be crossed a little in love now and then.It is something to think of, and it gives her a sort of distinctionamong her companions. When is your turn to come? You will hardly bear tobe long outdone by Jane. Now is your time. Here are officers enough inMeryton to disappoint all the young ladies in the country. Let Wickhambe _your_ man. He is a pleasant fellow, and would jilt you creditably.”“Thank you, sir, but a less agreeable man would satisfy me. We must notall expect Jane’s good fortune.”“True,” said Mr. Bennet, “but it is a comfort to think that whatever ofthat kind may befall you, you have an affectionate mother who will makethe most of it.”Mr. Wickham’s society was of material service in dispelling the gloomwhich the late perverse occurrences had thrown on many of the Longbournfamily. They saw him often, and to his other recommendations was nowadded that of general unreserve. The whole of what Elizabeth had alreadyheard, his claims on Mr. Darcy, and all that he had suffered from him,was now openly acknowledged and publicly canvassed; and everybody waspleased to know how much they had always disliked Mr. Darcy before theyhad known anything of the matter.Miss Bennet was the only creature who could suppose there might beany extenuating circumstances in the case, unknown to the societyof Hertfordshire; her mild and steady candour always pleaded forallowances, and urged the possibility of mistakes--but by everybody elseMr. Darcy was condemned as the worst of men.Chapter 25After a week spent in professions of love and schemes of felicity,Mr. Collins was called from his amiable Charlotte by the arrival ofSaturday. The pain of separation, however, might be alleviated on hisside, by preparations for the reception of his bride; as he had reasonto hope, that shortly after his return into Hertfordshire, the day wouldbe fixed that was to make him the happiest of men. He took leave of hisrelations at Longbourn with as much solemnity as before; wished his faircousins health and happiness again, and promised their father anotherletter of thanks.On the following Monday, Mrs. Bennet had the pleasure of receivingher brother and his wife, who came as usual to spend the Christmasat Longbourn. Mr. Gardiner was a sensible, gentlemanlike man, greatlysuperior to his sister, as well by nature as education. The Netherfieldladies would have had difficulty in believing that a man who livedby trade, and within view of his own warehouses, could have been sowell-bred and agreeable. Mrs. Gardiner, who was several years youngerthan Mrs. Bennet and Mrs. Phillips, was an amiable, intelligent, elegantwoman, and a great favourite with all her Longbourn nieces. Between thetwo eldest and herself especially, there subsisted a particular regard.They had frequently been staying with her in town.The first part of Mrs. Gardiner’s business on her arrival was todistribute her presents and describe the newest fashions. When this wasdone she had a less active part to play. It became her turn to listen.Mrs. Bennet had many grievances to relate, and much to complain of. Theyhad all been very ill-used since she last saw her sister. Two of hergirls had been upon the point of marriage, and after all there wasnothing in it.“I do not blame Jane,” she continued, “for Jane would have got Mr.Bingley if she could. But Lizzy! Oh, sister! It is very hard to thinkthat she might have been Mr. Collins’s wife by this time, had it notbeen for her own perverseness. He made her an offer in this very room,and she refused him. The consequence of it is, that Lady Lucas will havea daughter married before I have, and that the Longbourn estate is justas much entailed as ever. The Lucases are very artful people indeed,sister. They are all for what they can get. I am sorry to say it ofthem, but so it is. It makes me very nervous and poorly, to be thwartedso in my own family, and to have neighbours who think of themselvesbefore anybody else. However, your coming just at this time is thegreatest of comforts, and I am very glad to hear what you tell us, oflong sleeves.”Mrs. Gardiner, to whom the chief of this news had been given before,in the course of Jane and Elizabeth’s correspondence with her, made hersister a slight answer, and, in compassion to her nieces, turned theconversation.When alone with Elizabeth afterwards, she spoke more on the subject. “Itseems likely to have been a desirable match for Jane,” said she. “I amsorry it went off. But these things happen so often! A young man, suchas you describe Mr. Bingley, so easily falls in love with a pretty girlfor a few weeks, and when accident separates them, so easily forgetsher, that these sort of inconsistencies are very frequent.”“An excellent consolation in its way,” said Elizabeth, “but it will notdo for _us_. We do not suffer by _accident_. It does not oftenhappen that the interference of friends will persuade a young man ofindependent fortune to think no more of a girl whom he was violently inlove with only a few days before.”“But that expression of ‘violently in love’ is so hackneyed, sodoubtful, so indefinite, that it gives me very little idea. It is asoften applied to feelings which arise from a half-hour’s acquaintance,as to a real, strong attachment. Pray, how _violent was_ Mr. Bingley’slove?”“I never saw a more promising inclination; he was growing quiteinattentive to other people, and wholly engrossed by her. Every timethey met, it was more decided and remarkable. At his own ball heoffended two or three young ladies, by not asking them to dance; and Ispoke to him twice myself, without receiving an answer. Could there befiner symptoms? Is not general incivility the very essence of love?”“Oh, yes!--of that kind of love which I suppose him to have felt. PoorJane! I am sorry for her, because, with her disposition, she may not getover it immediately. It had better have happened to _you_, Lizzy; youwould have laughed yourself out of it sooner. But do you think shewould be prevailed upon to go back with us? Change of scene might beof service--and perhaps a little relief from home may be as useful asanything.”Elizabeth was exceedingly pleased with this proposal, and felt persuadedof her sister’s ready acquiescence.“I hope,” added Mrs. Gardiner, “that no consideration with regard tothis young man will influence her. We live in so different a part oftown, all our connections are so different, and, as you well know, we goout so little, that it is very improbable that they should meet at all,unless he really comes to see her.”“And _that_ is quite impossible; for he is now in the custody of hisfriend, and Mr. Darcy would no more suffer him to call on Jane in sucha part of London! My dear aunt, how could you think of it? Mr. Darcy mayperhaps have _heard_ of such a place as Gracechurch Street, but hewould hardly think a month’s ablution enough to cleanse him from itsimpurities, were he once to enter it; and depend upon it, Mr. Bingleynever stirs without him.”“So much the better. I hope they will not meet at all. But does not Janecorrespond with his sister? _She_ will not be able to help calling.”“She will drop the acquaintance entirely.”But in spite of the certainty in which Elizabeth affected to place thispoint, as well as the still more interesting one of Bingley’s beingwithheld from seeing Jane, she felt a solicitude on the subject whichconvinced her, on examination, that she did not consider it entirelyhopeless. It was possible, and sometimes she thought it probable, thathis affection might be reanimated, and the influence of his friendssuccessfully combated by the more natural influence of Jane’sattractions.Miss Bennet accepted her aunt’s invitation with pleasure; and theBingleys were no otherwise in her thoughts at the same time, than as shehoped by Caroline’s not living in the same house with her brother,she might occasionally spend a morning with her, without any danger ofseeing him.The Gardiners stayed a week at Longbourn; and what with the Phillipses,the Lucases, and the officers, there was not a day without itsengagement. Mrs. Bennet had so carefully provided for the entertainmentof her brother and sister, that they did not once sit down to a familydinner. When the engagement was for home, some of the officers alwaysmade part of it--of which officers Mr. Wickham was sure to be one; andon these occasions, Mrs. Gardiner, rendered suspicious by Elizabeth’swarm commendation, narrowly observed them both. Without supposing them,from what she saw, to be very seriously in love, their preferenceof each other was plain enough to make her a little uneasy; andshe resolved to speak to Elizabeth on the subject before she leftHertfordshire, and represent to her the imprudence of encouraging suchan attachment.To Mrs. Gardiner, Wickham had one means of affording pleasure,unconnected with his general powers. About ten or a dozen years ago,before her marriage, she had spent a considerable time in that verypart of Derbyshire to which he belonged. They had, therefore, manyacquaintances in common; and though Wickham had been little there sincethe death of Darcy’s father, it was yet in his power to give her fresherintelligence of her former friends than she had been in the way ofprocuring.Mrs. Gardiner had seen Pemberley, and known the late Mr. Darcy bycharacter perfectly well. Here consequently was an inexhaustible subjectof discourse. In comparing her recollection of Pemberley with the minutedescription which Wickham could give, and in bestowing her tribute ofpraise on the character of its late possessor, she was delighting bothhim and herself. On being made acquainted with the present Mr. Darcy’streatment of him, she tried to remember some of that gentleman’sreputed disposition when quite a lad which might agree with it, andwas confident at last that she recollected having heard Mr. FitzwilliamDarcy formerly spoken of as a very proud, ill-natured boy.Chapter 26Mrs. Gardiner’s caution to Elizabeth was punctually and kindly givenon the first favourable opportunity of speaking to her alone; afterhonestly telling her what she thought, she thus went on:“You are too sensible a girl, Lizzy, to fall in love merely becauseyou are warned against it; and, therefore, I am not afraid of speakingopenly. Seriously, I would have you be on your guard. Do not involveyourself or endeavour to involve him in an affection which the wantof fortune would make so very imprudent. I have nothing to say against_him_; he is a most interesting young man; and if he had the fortune heought to have, I should think you could not do better. But as it is, youmust not let your fancy run away with you. You have sense, and we allexpect you to use it. Your father would depend on _your_ resolution andgood conduct, I am sure. You must not disappoint your father.”“My dear aunt, this is being serious indeed.”“Yes, and I hope to engage you to be serious likewise.”“Well, then, you need not be under any alarm. I will take care ofmyself, and of Mr. Wickham too. He shall not be in love with me, if Ican prevent it.”“Elizabeth, you are not serious now.”“I beg your pardon, I will try again. At present I am not in love withMr. Wickham; no, I certainly am not. But he is, beyond all comparison,the most agreeable man I ever saw--and if he becomes really attached tome--I believe it will be better that he should not. I see the imprudenceof it. Oh! _that_ abominable Mr. Darcy! My father’s opinion of me doesme the greatest honour, and I should be miserable to forfeit it. Myfather, however, is partial to Mr. Wickham. In short, my dear aunt, Ishould be very sorry to be the means of making any of you unhappy; butsince we see every day that where there is affection, young peopleare seldom withheld by immediate want of fortune from entering intoengagements with each other, how can I promise to be wiser than so manyof my fellow-creatures if I am tempted, or how am I even to know that itwould be wisdom to resist? All that I can promise you, therefore, is notto be in a hurry. I will not be in a hurry to believe myself his firstobject. When I am in company with him, I will not be wishing. In short,I will do my best.”“Perhaps it will be as well if you discourage his coming here so veryoften. At least, you should not _remind_ your mother of inviting him.”“As I did the other day,” said Elizabeth with a conscious smile: “verytrue, it will be wise in me to refrain from _that_. But do not imaginethat he is always here so often. It is on your account that he has beenso frequently invited this week. You know my mother’s ideas as to thenecessity of constant company for her friends. But really, and upon myhonour, I will try to do what I think to be the wisest; and now I hopeyou are satisfied.”Her aunt assured her that she was, and Elizabeth having thanked her forthe kindness of her hints, they parted; a wonderful instance of advicebeing given on such a point, without being resented.Mr. Collins returned into Hertfordshire soon after it had been quittedby the Gardiners and Jane; but as he took up his abode with the Lucases,his arrival was no great inconvenience to Mrs. Bennet. His marriage wasnow fast approaching, and she was at length so far resigned as to thinkit inevitable, and even repeatedly to say, in an ill-natured tone, thatshe “_wished_ they might be happy.” Thursday was to be the wedding day,and on Wednesday Miss Lucas paid her farewell visit; and when sherose to take leave, Elizabeth, ashamed of her mother’s ungracious andreluctant good wishes, and sincerely affected herself, accompanied herout of the room. As they went downstairs together, Charlotte said:“I shall depend on hearing from you very often, Eliza.”“_That_ you certainly shall.”“And I have another favour to ask you. Will you come and see me?”“We shall often meet, I hope, in Hertfordshire.”“I am not likely to leave Kent for some time. Promise me, therefore, tocome to Hunsford.”Elizabeth could not refuse, though she foresaw little pleasure in thevisit.“My father and Maria are coming to me in March,” added Charlotte, “and Ihope you will consent to be of the party. Indeed, Eliza, you will be aswelcome as either of them.”The wedding took place; the bride and bridegroom set off for Kent fromthe church door, and everybody had as much to say, or to hear, onthe subject as usual. Elizabeth soon heard from her friend; and theircorrespondence was as regular and frequent as it had ever been; thatit should be equally unreserved was impossible. Elizabeth could neveraddress her without feeling that all the comfort of intimacy was over,and though determined not to slacken as a correspondent, it was for thesake of what had been, rather than what was. Charlotte’s first letterswere received with a good deal of eagerness; there could not but becuriosity to know how she would speak of her new home, how she wouldlike Lady Catherine, and how happy she would dare pronounce herself tobe; though, when the letters were read, Elizabeth felt that Charlotteexpressed herself on every point exactly as she might have foreseen. Shewrote cheerfully, seemed surrounded with comforts, and mentioned nothingwhich she could not praise. The house, furniture, neighbourhood, androads, were all to her taste, and Lady Catherine’s behaviour was mostfriendly and obliging. It was Mr. Collins’s picture of Hunsford andRosings rationally softened; and Elizabeth perceived that she must waitfor her own visit there to know the rest.Jane had already written a few lines to her sister to announce theirsafe arrival in London; and when she wrote again, Elizabeth hoped itwould be in her power to say something of the Bingleys.Her impatience for this second letter was as well rewarded as impatiencegenerally is. Jane had been a week in town without either seeing orhearing from Caroline. She accounted for it, however, by supposing thather last letter to her friend from Longbourn had by some accident beenlost.“My aunt,” she continued, “is going to-morrow into that part of thetown, and I shall take the opportunity of calling in Grosvenor Street.”She wrote again when the visit was paid, and she had seen Miss Bingley.“I did not think Caroline in spirits,” were her words, “but she was veryglad to see me, and reproached me for giving her no notice of my comingto London. I was right, therefore, my last letter had never reachedher. I inquired after their brother, of course. He was well, but so muchengaged with Mr. Darcy that they scarcely ever saw him. I found thatMiss Darcy was expected to dinner. I wish I could see her. My visit wasnot long, as Caroline and Mrs. Hurst were going out. I dare say I shallsee them soon here.”Elizabeth shook her head over this letter. It convinced her thataccident only could discover to Mr. Bingley her sister’s being in town.Four weeks passed away, and Jane saw nothing of him. She endeavoured topersuade herself that she did not regret it; but she could no longer beblind to Miss Bingley’s inattention. After waiting at home every morningfor a fortnight, and inventing every evening a fresh excuse for her, thevisitor did at last appear; but the shortness of her stay, and yet more,the alteration of her manner would allow Jane to deceive herself nolonger. The letter which she wrote on this occasion to her sister willprove what she felt.“My dearest Lizzy will, I am sure, be incapable of triumphing in herbetter judgement, at my expense, when I confess myself to have beenentirely deceived in Miss Bingley’s regard for me. But, my dear sister,though the event has proved you right, do not think me obstinate if Istill assert that, considering what her behaviour was, my confidence wasas natural as your suspicion. I do not at all comprehend her reason forwishing to be intimate with me; but if the same circumstances were tohappen again, I am sure I should be deceived again. Caroline did notreturn my visit till yesterday; and not a note, not a line, did Ireceive in the meantime. When she did come, it was very evident thatshe had no pleasure in it; she made a slight, formal apology, for notcalling before, said not a word of wishing to see me again, and wasin every respect so altered a creature, that when she went away I wasperfectly resolved to continue the acquaintance no longer. I pity,though I cannot help blaming her. She was very wrong in singling me outas she did; I can safely say that every advance to intimacy began onher side. But I pity her, because she must feel that she has been actingwrong, and because I am very sure that anxiety for her brother is thecause of it. I need not explain myself farther; and though _we_ knowthis anxiety to be quite needless, yet if she feels it, it will easilyaccount for her behaviour to me; and so deservedly dear as he is tohis sister, whatever anxiety she must feel on his behalf is natural andamiable. I cannot but wonder, however, at her having any such fears now,because, if he had at all cared about me, we must have met, long ago.He knows of my being in town, I am certain, from something she saidherself; and yet it would seem, by her manner of talking, as if shewanted to persuade herself that he is really partial to Miss Darcy. Icannot understand it. If I were not afraid of judging harshly, I shouldbe almost tempted to say that there is a strong appearance of duplicityin all this. But I will endeavour to banish every painful thought,and think only of what will make me happy--your affection, and theinvariable kindness of my dear uncle and aunt. Let me hear from you verysoon. Miss Bingley said something of his never returning to Netherfieldagain, of giving up the house, but not with any certainty. We had betternot mention it. I am extremely glad that you have such pleasant accountsfrom our friends at Hunsford. Pray go to see them, with Sir William andMaria. I am sure you will be very comfortable there.--Yours, etc.”This letter gave Elizabeth some pain; but her spirits returned as sheconsidered that Jane would no longer be duped, by the sister at least.All expectation from the brother was now absolutely over. She would noteven wish for a renewal of his attentions. His character sunk onevery review of it; and as a punishment for him, as well as a possibleadvantage to Jane, she seriously hoped he might really soon marry Mr.Darcy’s sister, as by Wickham’s account, she would make him abundantlyregret what he had thrown away.Mrs. Gardiner about this time reminded Elizabeth of her promiseconcerning that gentleman, and required information; and Elizabethhad such to send as might rather give contentment to her aunt than toherself. His apparent partiality had subsided, his attentions were over,he was the admirer of some one else. Elizabeth was watchful enough tosee it all, but she could see it and write of it without material pain.Her heart had been but slightly touched, and her vanity was satisfiedwith believing that _she_ would have been his only choice, had fortunepermitted it. The sudden acquisition of ten thousand pounds was the mostremarkable charm of the young lady to whom he was now rendering himselfagreeable; but Elizabeth, less clear-sighted perhaps in this case thanin Charlotte’s, did not quarrel with him for his wish of independence.Nothing, on the contrary, could be more natural; and while able tosuppose that it cost him a few struggles to relinquish her, she wasready to allow it a wise and desirable measure for both, and could verysincerely wish him happy.All this was acknowledged to Mrs. Gardiner; and after relating thecircumstances, she thus went on: “I am now convinced, my dear aunt, thatI have never been much in love; for had I really experienced that pureand elevating passion, I should at present detest his very name, andwish him all manner of evil. But my feelings are not only cordialtowards _him_; they are even impartial towards Miss King. I cannot findout that I hate her at all, or that I am in the least unwilling tothink her a very good sort of girl. There can be no love in all this. Mywatchfulness has been effectual; and though I certainly should be a moreinteresting object to all my acquaintances were I distractedly in lovewith him, I cannot say that I regret my comparative insignificance.Importance may sometimes be purchased too dearly. Kitty and Lydia takehis defection much more to heart than I do. They are young in theways of the world, and not yet open to the mortifying conviction thathandsome young men must have something to live on as well as the plain.”Chapter 27With no greater events than these in the Longbourn family, and otherwisediversified by little beyond the walks to Meryton, sometimes dirty andsometimes cold, did January and February pass away. March was to takeElizabeth to Hunsford. She had not at first thought very seriously ofgoing thither; but Charlotte, she soon found, was depending on the planand she gradually learned to consider it herself with greater pleasureas well as greater certainty. Absence had increased her desire of seeingCharlotte again, and weakened her disgust of Mr. Collins. Therewas novelty in the scheme, and as, with such a mother and suchuncompanionable sisters, home could not be faultless, a little changewas not unwelcome for its own sake. The journey would moreover give hera peep at Jane; and, in short, as the time drew near, she would havebeen very sorry for any delay. Everything, however, went on smoothly,and was finally settled according to Charlotte’s first sketch. She wasto accompany Sir William and his second daughter. The improvementof spending a night in London was added in time, and the plan becameperfect as plan could be.The only pain was in leaving her father, who would certainly miss her,and who, when it came to the point, so little liked her going, that hetold her to write to him, and almost promised to answer her letter.The farewell between herself and Mr. Wickham was perfectly friendly; onhis side even more. His present pursuit could not make him forget thatElizabeth had been the first to excite and to deserve his attention, thefirst to listen and to pity, the first to be admired; and in his mannerof bidding her adieu, wishing her every enjoyment, reminding her ofwhat she was to expect in Lady Catherine de Bourgh, and trusting theiropinion of her--their opinion of everybody--would always coincide, therewas a solicitude, an interest which she felt must ever attach her tohim with a most sincere regard; and she parted from him convinced that,whether married or single, he must always be her model of the amiableand pleasing.Her fellow-travellers the next day were not of a kind to make herthink him less agreeable. Sir William Lucas, and his daughter Maria, agood-humoured girl, but as empty-headed as himself, had nothing to saythat could be worth hearing, and were listened to with about as muchdelight as the rattle of the chaise. Elizabeth loved absurdities, butshe had known Sir William’s too long. He could tell her nothing new ofthe wonders of his presentation and knighthood; and his civilities wereworn out, like his information.It was a journey of only twenty-four miles, and they began it so earlyas to be in Gracechurch Street by noon. As they drove to Mr. Gardiner’sdoor, Jane was at a drawing-room window watching their arrival; whenthey entered the passage she was there to welcome them, and Elizabeth,looking earnestly in her face, was pleased to see it healthful andlovely as ever. On the stairs were a troop of little boys and girls,whose eagerness for their cousin’s appearance would not allow them towait in the drawing-room, and whose shyness, as they had not seenher for a twelvemonth, prevented their coming lower. All was joy andkindness. The day passed most pleasantly away; the morning in bustle andshopping, and the evening at one of the theatres.Elizabeth then contrived to sit by her aunt. Their first object was hersister; and she was more grieved than astonished to hear, in reply toher minute inquiries, that though Jane always struggled to support herspirits, there were periods of dejection. It was reasonable, however,to hope that they would not continue long. Mrs. Gardiner gave her theparticulars also of Miss Bingley’s visit in Gracechurch Street, andrepeated conversations occurring at different times between Jane andherself, which proved that the former had, from her heart, given up theacquaintance.Mrs. Gardiner then rallied her niece on Wickham’s desertion, andcomplimented her on bearing it so well.“But my dear Elizabeth,” she added, “what sort of girl is Miss King? Ishould be sorry to think our friend mercenary.”“Pray, my dear aunt, what is the difference in matrimonial affairs,between the mercenary and the prudent motive? Where does discretion end,and avarice begin? Last Christmas you were afraid of his marrying me,because it would be imprudent; and now, because he is trying to geta girl with only ten thousand pounds, you want to find out that he ismercenary.”“If you will only tell me what sort of girl Miss King is, I shall knowwhat to think.”“She is a very good kind of girl, I believe. I know no harm of her.”“But he paid her not the smallest attention till her grandfather’s deathmade her mistress of this fortune.”“No--why should he? If it were not allowable for him to gain _my_affections because I had no money, what occasion could there be formaking love to a girl whom he did not care about, and who was equallypoor?”“But there seems an indelicacy in directing his attentions towards herso soon after this event.”“A man in distressed circumstances has not time for all those elegantdecorums which other people may observe. If _she_ does not object to it,why should _we_?”“_Her_ not objecting does not justify _him_. It only shows her beingdeficient in something herself--sense or feeling.”“Well,” cried Elizabeth, “have it as you choose. _He_ shall bemercenary, and _she_ shall be foolish.”“No, Lizzy, that is what I do _not_ choose. I should be sorry, you know,to think ill of a young man who has lived so long in Derbyshire.”“Oh! if that is all, I have a very poor opinion of young men who live inDerbyshire; and their intimate friends who live in Hertfordshire are notmuch better. I am sick of them all. Thank Heaven! I am going to-morrowwhere I shall find a man who has not one agreeable quality, who hasneither manner nor sense to recommend him. Stupid men are the only onesworth knowing, after all.”“Take care, Lizzy; that speech savours strongly of disappointment.”Before they were separated by the conclusion of the play, she had theunexpected happiness of an invitation to accompany her uncle and aunt ina tour of pleasure which they proposed taking in the summer.“We have not determined how far it shall carry us,” said Mrs. Gardiner,“but, perhaps, to the Lakes.”No scheme could have been more agreeable to Elizabeth, and heracceptance of the invitation was most ready and grateful. “Oh, my dear,dear aunt,” she rapturously cried, “what delight! what felicity! Yougive me fresh life and vigour. Adieu to disappointment and spleen. Whatare young men to rocks and mountains? Oh! what hours of transportwe shall spend! And when we _do_ return, it shall not be like othertravellers, without being able to give one accurate idea of anything. We_will_ know where we have gone--we _will_ recollect what we have seen.Lakes, mountains, and rivers shall not be jumbled together in ourimaginations; nor when we attempt to describe any particular scene,will we begin quarreling about its relative situation. Let _our_first effusions be less insupportable than those of the generality oftravellers.”Chapter 28Every object in the next day’s journey was new and interesting toElizabeth; and her spirits were in a state of enjoyment; for she hadseen her sister looking so well as to banish all fear for her health,and the prospect of her northern tour was a constant source of delight.When they left the high road for the lane to Hunsford, every eye was insearch of the Parsonage, and every turning expected to bring it in view.The palings of Rosings Park was their boundary on one side. Elizabethsmiled at the recollection of all that she had heard of its inhabitants.At length the Parsonage was discernible. The garden sloping to theroad, the house standing in it, the green pales, and the laurel hedge,everything declared they were arriving. Mr. Collins and Charlotteappeared at the door, and the carriage stopped at the small gate whichled by a short gravel walk to the house, amidst the nods and smiles ofthe whole party. In a moment they were all out of the chaise, rejoicingat the sight of each other. Mrs. Collins welcomed her friend with theliveliest pleasure, and Elizabeth was more and more satisfied withcoming when she found herself so affectionately received. She sawinstantly that her cousin’s manners were not altered by his marriage;his formal civility was just what it had been, and he detained her someminutes at the gate to hear and satisfy his inquiries after all herfamily. They were then, with no other delay than his pointing out theneatness of the entrance, taken into the house; and as soon as theywere in the parlour, he welcomed them a second time, with ostentatiousformality to his humble abode, and punctually repeated all his wife’soffers of refreshment.Elizabeth was prepared to see him in his glory; and she could not helpin fancying that in displaying the good proportion of the room, itsaspect and its furniture, he addressed himself particularly to her,as if wishing to make her feel what she had lost in refusing him. Butthough everything seemed neat and comfortable, she was not able togratify him by any sigh of repentance, and rather looked with wonder ather friend that she could have so cheerful an air with such a companion.When Mr. Collins said anything of which his wife might reasonably beashamed, which certainly was not unseldom, she involuntarily turned hereye on Charlotte. Once or twice she could discern a faint blush; butin general Charlotte wisely did not hear. After sitting long enough toadmire every article of furniture in the room, from the sideboard tothe fender, to give an account of their journey, and of all that hadhappened in London, Mr. Collins invited them to take a stroll in thegarden, which was large and well laid out, and to the cultivation ofwhich he attended himself. To work in this garden was one of his mostrespectable pleasures; and Elizabeth admired the command of countenancewith which Charlotte talked of the healthfulness of the exercise, andowned she encouraged it as much as possible. Here, leading the waythrough every walk and cross walk, and scarcely allowing them aninterval to utter the praises he asked for, every view was pointed outwith a minuteness which left beauty entirely behind. He could number thefields in every direction, and could tell how many trees there were inthe most distant clump. But of all the views which his garden, or whichthe country or kingdom could boast, none were to be compared with theprospect of Rosings, afforded by an opening in the trees that borderedthe park nearly opposite the front of his house. It was a handsomemodern building, well situated on rising ground.From his garden, Mr. Collins would have led them round his two meadows;but the ladies, not having shoes to encounter the remains of a whitefrost, turned back; and while Sir William accompanied him, Charlottetook her sister and friend over the house, extremely well pleased,probably, to have the opportunity of showing it without her husband’shelp. It was rather small, but well built and convenient; and everythingwas fitted up and arranged with a neatness and consistency of whichElizabeth gave Charlotte all the credit. When Mr. Collins could beforgotten, there was really an air of great comfort throughout, and byCharlotte’s evident enjoyment of it, Elizabeth supposed he must be oftenforgotten.She had already learnt that Lady Catherine was still in the country. Itwas spoken of again while they were at dinner, when Mr. Collins joiningin, observed:“Yes, Miss Elizabeth, you will have the honour of seeing Lady Catherinede Bourgh on the ensuing Sunday at church, and I need not say you willbe delighted with her. She is all affability and condescension, and Idoubt not but you will be honoured with some portion of her noticewhen service is over. I have scarcely any hesitation in saying shewill include you and my sister Maria in every invitation with which shehonours us during your stay here. Her behaviour to my dear Charlotte ischarming. We dine at Rosings twice every week, and are never allowedto walk home. Her ladyship’s carriage is regularly ordered for us. I_should_ say, one of her ladyship’s carriages, for she has several.”“Lady Catherine is a very respectable, sensible woman indeed,” addedCharlotte, “and a most attentive neighbour.”“Very true, my dear, that is exactly what I say. She is the sort ofwoman whom one cannot regard with too much deference.”The evening was spent chiefly in talking over Hertfordshire news,and telling again what had already been written; and when it closed,Elizabeth, in the solitude of her chamber, had to meditate uponCharlotte’s degree of contentment, to understand her address in guiding,and composure in bearing with, her husband, and to acknowledge that itwas all done very well. She had also to anticipate how her visitwould pass, the quiet tenor of their usual employments, the vexatiousinterruptions of Mr. Collins, and the gaieties of their intercourse withRosings. A lively imagination soon settled it all.About the middle of the next day, as she was in her room getting readyfor a walk, a sudden noise below seemed to speak the whole house inconfusion; and, after listening a moment, she heard somebody runningup stairs in a violent hurry, and calling loudly after her. She openedthe door and met Maria in the landing place, who, breathless withagitation, cried out--“Oh, my dear Eliza! pray make haste and come into the dining-room, forthere is such a sight to be seen! I will not tell you what it is. Makehaste, and come down this moment.”Elizabeth asked questions in vain; Maria would tell her nothing more,and down they ran into the dining-room, which fronted the lane, inquest of this wonder; It was two ladies stopping in a low phaeton at thegarden gate.“And is this all?” cried Elizabeth. “I expected at least that the pigswere got into the garden, and here is nothing but Lady Catherine and herdaughter.”“La! my dear,” said Maria, quite shocked at the mistake, “it is notLady Catherine. The old lady is Mrs. Jenkinson, who lives with them;the other is Miss de Bourgh. Only look at her. She is quite a littlecreature. Who would have thought that she could be so thin and small?”“She is abominably rude to keep Charlotte out of doors in all this wind.Why does she not come in?”“Oh, Charlotte says she hardly ever does. It is the greatest of favourswhen Miss de Bourgh comes in.”“I like her appearance,” said Elizabeth, struck with other ideas. “Shelooks sickly and cross. Yes, she will do for him very well. She willmake him a very proper wife.”Mr. Collins and Charlotte were both standing at the gate in conversationwith the ladies; and Sir William, to Elizabeth’s high diversion, wasstationed in the doorway, in earnest contemplation of the greatnessbefore him, and constantly bowing whenever Miss de Bourgh looked thatway.At length there was nothing more to be said; the ladies drove on, andthe others returned into the house. Mr. Collins no sooner saw the twogirls than he began to congratulate them on their good fortune, whichCharlotte explained by letting them know that the whole party was askedto dine at Rosings the next day.Chapter 29Mr. Collins’s triumph, in consequence of this invitation, was complete.The power of displaying the grandeur of his patroness to his wonderingvisitors, and of letting them see her civility towards himself and hiswife, was exactly what he had wished for; and that an opportunityof doing it should be given so soon, was such an instance of LadyCatherine’s condescension, as he knew not how to admire enough.“I confess,” said he, “that I should not have been at all surprised byher ladyship’s asking us on Sunday to drink tea and spend the evening atRosings. I rather expected, from my knowledge of her affability, that itwould happen. But who could have foreseen such an attention as this? Whocould have imagined that we should receive an invitation to dine there(an invitation, moreover, including the whole party) so immediatelyafter your arrival!”“I am the less surprised at what has happened,” replied Sir William,“from that knowledge of what the manners of the great really are, whichmy situation in life has allowed me to acquire. About the court, suchinstances of elegant breeding are not uncommon.”Scarcely anything was talked of the whole day or next morning but theirvisit to Rosings. Mr. Collins was carefully instructing them in whatthey were to expect, that the sight of such rooms, so many servants, andso splendid a dinner, might not wholly overpower them.When the ladies were separating for the toilette, he said to Elizabeth--“Do not make yourself uneasy, my dear cousin, about your apparel. LadyCatherine is far from requiring that elegance of dress in us whichbecomes herself and her daughter. I would advise you merely to put onwhatever of your clothes is superior to the rest--there is no occasionfor anything more. Lady Catherine will not think the worse of youfor being simply dressed. She likes to have the distinction of rankpreserved.”While they were dressing, he came two or three times to their differentdoors, to recommend their being quick, as Lady Catherine very muchobjected to be kept waiting for her dinner. Such formidable accounts ofher ladyship, and her manner of living, quite frightened Maria Lucaswho had been little used to company, and she looked forward to herintroduction at Rosings with as much apprehension as her father had doneto his presentation at St. James’s.As the weather was fine, they had a pleasant walk of about half amile across the park. Every park has its beauty and its prospects; andElizabeth saw much to be pleased with, though she could not be in suchraptures as Mr. Collins expected the scene to inspire, and was butslightly affected by his enumeration of the windows in front of thehouse, and his relation of what the glazing altogether had originallycost Sir Lewis de Bourgh.When they ascended the steps to the hall, Maria’s alarm was everymoment increasing, and even Sir William did not look perfectly calm.Elizabeth’s courage did not fail her. She had heard nothing of LadyCatherine that spoke her awful from any extraordinary talents ormiraculous virtue, and the mere stateliness of money or rank she thoughtshe could witness without trepidation.From the entrance-hall, of which Mr. Collins pointed out, with arapturous air, the fine proportion and the finished ornaments, theyfollowed the servants through an ante-chamber, to the room where LadyCatherine, her daughter, and Mrs. Jenkinson were sitting. Her ladyship,with great condescension, arose to receive them; and as Mrs. Collins hadsettled it with her husband that the office of introduction shouldbe hers, it was performed in a proper manner, without any of thoseapologies and thanks which he would have thought necessary.In spite of having been at St. James’s, Sir William was so completelyawed by the grandeur surrounding him, that he had but just courageenough to make a very low bow, and take his seat without saying a word;and his daughter, frightened almost out of her senses, sat on the edgeof her chair, not knowing which way to look. Elizabeth found herselfquite equal to the scene, and could observe the three ladies before hercomposedly. Lady Catherine was a tall, large woman, with strongly-markedfeatures, which might once have been handsome. Her air was notconciliating, nor was her manner of receiving them such as to make hervisitors forget their inferior rank. She was not rendered formidable bysilence; but whatever she said was spoken in so authoritative a tone,as marked her self-importance, and brought Mr. Wickham immediately toElizabeth’s mind; and from the observation of the day altogether, shebelieved Lady Catherine to be exactly what he represented.When, after examining the mother, in whose countenance and deportmentshe soon found some resemblance of Mr. Darcy, she turned her eyes on thedaughter, she could almost have joined in Maria’s astonishment at herbeing so thin and so small. There was neither in figure nor face anylikeness between the ladies. Miss de Bourgh was pale and sickly; herfeatures, though not plain, were insignificant; and she spoke verylittle, except in a low voice, to Mrs. Jenkinson, in whose appearancethere was nothing remarkable, and who was entirely engaged in listeningto what she said, and placing a screen in the proper direction beforeher eyes.After sitting a few minutes, they were all sent to one of the windows toadmire the view, Mr. Collins attending them to point out its beauties,and Lady Catherine kindly informing them that it was much better worthlooking at in the summer.The dinner was exceedingly handsome, and there were all the servants andall the articles of plate which Mr. Collins had promised; and, as he hadlikewise foretold, he took his seat at the bottom of the table, by herladyship’s desire, and looked as if he felt that life could furnishnothing greater. He carved, and ate, and praised with delightedalacrity; and every dish was commended, first by him and then by SirWilliam, who was now enough recovered to echo whatever his son-in-lawsaid, in a manner which Elizabeth wondered Lady Catherine could bear.But Lady Catherine seemed gratified by their excessive admiration, andgave most gracious smiles, especially when any dish on the table proveda novelty to them. The party did not supply much conversation. Elizabethwas ready to speak whenever there was an opening, but she was seatedbetween Charlotte and Miss de Bourgh--the former of whom was engaged inlistening to Lady Catherine, and the latter said not a word to her alldinner-time. Mrs. Jenkinson was chiefly employed in watching how littleMiss de Bourgh ate, pressing her to try some other dish, and fearingshe was indisposed. Maria thought speaking out of the question, and thegentlemen did nothing but eat and admire.When the ladies returned to the drawing-room, there was little tobe done but to hear Lady Catherine talk, which she did without anyintermission till coffee came in, delivering her opinion on everysubject in so decisive a manner, as proved that she was not used tohave her judgement controverted. She inquired into Charlotte’s domesticconcerns familiarly and minutely, gave her a great deal of advice asto the management of them all; told her how everything ought to beregulated in so small a family as hers, and instructed her as to thecare of her cows and her poultry. Elizabeth found that nothing wasbeneath this great lady’s attention, which could furnish her with anoccasion of dictating to others. In the intervals of her discoursewith Mrs. Collins, she addressed a variety of questions to Maria andElizabeth, but especially to the latter, of whose connections she knewthe least, and who she observed to Mrs. Collins was a very genteel,pretty kind of girl. She asked her, at different times, how many sistersshe had, whether they were older or younger than herself, whether any ofthem were likely to be married, whether they were handsome, where theyhad been educated, what carriage her father kept, and what had beenher mother’s maiden name? Elizabeth felt all the impertinence ofher questions but answered them very composedly. Lady Catherine thenobserved,“Your father’s estate is entailed on Mr. Collins, I think. For yoursake,” turning to Charlotte, “I am glad of it; but otherwise I see nooccasion for entailing estates from the female line. It was not thoughtnecessary in Sir Lewis de Bourgh’s family. Do you play and sing, MissBennet?”“A little.”“Oh! then--some time or other we shall be happy to hear you. Ourinstrument is a capital one, probably superior to----You shall try itsome day. Do your sisters play and sing?”“One of them does.”“Why did not you all learn? You ought all to have learned. The MissWebbs all play, and their father has not so good an income as yours. Doyou draw?”“No, not at all.”“What, none of you?”“Not one.”“That is very strange. But I suppose you had no opportunity. Your mothershould have taken you to town every spring for the benefit of masters.”“My mother would have had no objection, but my father hates London.”“Has your governess left you?”“We never had any governess.”“No governess! How was that possible? Five daughters brought up at homewithout a governess! I never heard of such a thing. Your mother musthave been quite a slave to your education.”Elizabeth could hardly help smiling as she assured her that had not beenthe case.“Then, who taught you? who attended to you? Without a governess, youmust have been neglected.”“Compared with some families, I believe we were; but such of us aswished to learn never wanted the means. We were always encouraged toread, and had all the masters that were necessary. Those who chose to beidle, certainly might.”“Aye, no doubt; but that is what a governess will prevent, and if I hadknown your mother, I should have advised her most strenuously to engageone. I always say that nothing is to be done in education without steadyand regular instruction, and nobody but a governess can give it. It iswonderful how many families I have been the means of supplying in thatway. I am always glad to get a young person well placed out. Four niecesof Mrs. Jenkinson are most delightfully situated through my means; andit was but the other day that I recommended another young person,who was merely accidentally mentioned to me, and the family are quitedelighted with her. Mrs. Collins, did I tell you of Lady Metcalf’scalling yesterday to thank me? She finds Miss Pope a treasure. ‘LadyCatherine,’ said she, ‘you have given me a treasure.’ Are any of youryounger sisters out, Miss Bennet?”“Yes, ma’am, all.”“All! What, all five out at once? Very odd! And you only the second. Theyounger ones out before the elder ones are married! Your younger sistersmust be very young?”“Yes, my youngest is not sixteen. Perhaps _she_ is full young to bemuch in company. But really, ma’am, I think it would be very hard uponyounger sisters, that they should not have their share of society andamusement, because the elder may not have the means or inclination tomarry early. The last-born has as good a right to the pleasures of youthas the first. And to be kept back on _such_ a motive! I think it wouldnot be very likely to promote sisterly affection or delicacy of mind.”“Upon my word,” said her ladyship, “you give your opinion very decidedlyfor so young a person. Pray, what is your age?”“With three younger sisters grown up,” replied Elizabeth, smiling, “yourladyship can hardly expect me to own it.”Lady Catherine seemed quite astonished at not receiving a direct answer;and Elizabeth suspected herself to be the first creature who had everdared to trifle with so much dignified impertinence.“You cannot be more than twenty, I am sure, therefore you need notconceal your age.”“I am not one-and-twenty.”When the gentlemen had joined them, and tea was over, the card-tableswere placed. Lady Catherine, Sir William, and Mr. and Mrs. Collins satdown to quadrille; and as Miss de Bourgh chose to play at cassino, thetwo girls had the honour of assisting Mrs. Jenkinson to make up herparty. Their table was superlatively stupid. Scarcely a syllable wasuttered that did not relate to the game, except when Mrs. Jenkinsonexpressed her fears of Miss de Bourgh’s being too hot or too cold, orhaving too much or too little light. A great deal more passed at theother table. Lady Catherine was generally speaking--stating the mistakesof the three others, or relating some anecdote of herself. Mr. Collinswas employed in agreeing to everything her ladyship said, thanking herfor every fish he won, and apologising if he thought he won too many.Sir William did not say much. He was storing his memory with anecdotesand noble names.When Lady Catherine and her daughter had played as long as they chose,the tables were broken up, the carriage was offered to Mrs. Collins,gratefully accepted and immediately ordered. The party then gatheredround the fire to hear Lady Catherine determine what weather they wereto have on the morrow. From these instructions they were summoned bythe arrival of the coach; and with many speeches of thankfulness on Mr.Collins’s side and as many bows on Sir William’s they departed. As soonas they had driven from the door, Elizabeth was called on by her cousinto give her opinion of all that she had seen at Rosings, which, forCharlotte’s sake, she made more favourable than it really was. But hercommendation, though costing her some trouble, could by no means satisfyMr. Collins, and he was very soon obliged to take her ladyship’s praiseinto his own hands.Chapter 30Sir William stayed only a week at Hunsford, but his visit was longenough to convince him of his daughter’s being most comfortably settled,and of her possessing such a husband and such a neighbour as were notoften met with. While Sir William was with them, Mr. Collins devoted hismorning to driving him out in his gig, and showing him the country; butwhen he went away, the whole family returned to their usual employments,and Elizabeth was thankful to find that they did not see more of hercousin by the alteration, for the chief of the time between breakfastand dinner was now passed by him either at work in the garden or inreading and writing, and looking out of the window in his own book-room,which fronted the road. The room in which the ladies sat was backwards.Elizabeth had at first rather wondered that Charlotte should not preferthe dining-parlour for common use; it was a better sized room, and had amore pleasant aspect; but she soon saw that her friend had an excellentreason for what she did, for Mr. Collins would undoubtedly have beenmuch less in his own apartment, had they sat in one equally lively; andshe gave Charlotte credit for the arrangement.From the drawing-room they could distinguish nothing in the lane, andwere indebted to Mr. Collins for the knowledge of what carriages wentalong, and how often especially Miss de Bourgh drove by in her phaeton,which he never failed coming to inform them of, though it happenedalmost every day. She not unfrequently stopped at the Parsonage, andhad a few minutes’ conversation with Charlotte, but was scarcely everprevailed upon to get out.Very few days passed in which Mr. Collins did not walk to Rosings, andnot many in which his wife did not think it necessary to go likewise;and till Elizabeth recollected that there might be other family livingsto be disposed of, she could not understand the sacrifice of so manyhours. Now and then they were honoured with a call from her ladyship,and nothing escaped her observation that was passing in the room duringthese visits. She examined into their employments, looked at their work,and advised them to do it differently; found fault with the arrangementof the furniture; or detected the housemaid in negligence; and if sheaccepted any refreshment, seemed to do it only for the sake of findingout that Mrs. Collins’s joints of meat were too large for her family.Elizabeth soon perceived, that though this great lady was not incommission of the peace of the county, she was a most active magistratein her own parish, the minutest concerns of which were carried to herby Mr. Collins; and whenever any of the cottagers were disposed tobe quarrelsome, discontented, or too poor, she sallied forth into thevillage to settle their differences, silence their complaints, and scoldthem into harmony and plenty.The entertainment of dining at Rosings was repeated about twice a week;and, allowing for the loss of Sir William, and there being only onecard-table in the evening, every such entertainment was the counterpartof the first. Their other engagements were few, as the style of livingin the neighbourhood in general was beyond Mr. Collins’s reach. This,however, was no evil to Elizabeth, and upon the whole she spent her timecomfortably enough; there were half-hours of pleasant conversation withCharlotte, and the weather was so fine for the time of year that she hadoften great enjoyment out of doors. Her favourite walk, and where shefrequently went while the others were calling on Lady Catherine, wasalong the open grove which edged that side of the park, where there wasa nice sheltered path, which no one seemed to value but herself, andwhere she felt beyond the reach of Lady Catherine’s curiosity.In this quiet way, the first fortnight of her visit soon passed away.Easter was approaching, and the week preceding it was to bring anaddition to the family at Rosings, which in so small a circle must beimportant. Elizabeth had heard soon after her arrival that Mr. Darcy wasexpected there in the course of a few weeks, and though there were notmany of her acquaintances whom she did not prefer, his coming wouldfurnish one comparatively new to look at in their Rosings parties, andshe might be amused in seeing how hopeless Miss Bingley’s designs on himwere, by his behaviour to his cousin, for whom he was evidentlydestined by Lady Catherine, who talked of his coming with the greatestsatisfaction, spoke of him in terms of the highest admiration, andseemed almost angry to find that he had already been frequently seen byMiss Lucas and herself.His arrival was soon known at the Parsonage; for Mr. Collins was walkingthe whole morning within view of the lodges opening into Hunsford Lane,in order to have the earliest assurance of it, and after making hisbow as the carriage turned into the Park, hurried home with the greatintelligence. On the following morning he hastened to Rosings to pay hisrespects. There were two nephews of Lady Catherine to require them, forMr. Darcy had brought with him a Colonel Fitzwilliam, the younger son ofhis uncle Lord ----, and, to the great surprise of all the party, whenMr. Collins returned, the gentlemen accompanied him. Charlotte had seenthem from her husband’s room, crossing the road, and immediately runninginto the other, told the girls what an honour they might expect, adding:“I may thank you, Eliza, for this piece of civility. Mr. Darcy wouldnever have come so soon to wait upon me.”Elizabeth had scarcely time to disclaim all right to the compliment,before their approach was announced by the door-bell, and shortlyafterwards the three gentlemen entered the room. Colonel Fitzwilliam,who led the way, was about thirty, not handsome, but in person andaddress most truly the gentleman. Mr. Darcy looked just as he had beenused to look in Hertfordshire--paid his compliments, with his usualreserve, to Mrs. Collins, and whatever might be his feelings toward herfriend, met her with every appearance of composure. Elizabeth merelycurtseyed to him without saying a word.Colonel Fitzwilliam entered into conversation directly with thereadiness and ease of a well-bred man, and talked very pleasantly; buthis cousin, after having addressed a slight observation on the house andgarden to Mrs. Collins, sat for some time without speaking to anybody.At length, however, his civility was so far awakened as to inquire ofElizabeth after the health of her family. She answered him in the usualway, and after a moment’s pause, added:“My eldest sister has been in town these three months. Have you neverhappened to see her there?”She was perfectly sensible that he never had; but she wished to seewhether he would betray any consciousness of what had passed betweenthe Bingleys and Jane, and she thought he looked a little confused as heanswered that he had never been so fortunate as to meet Miss Bennet. Thesubject was pursued no farther, and the gentlemen soon afterwards wentaway.Chapter 31Colonel Fitzwilliam’s manners were very much admired at the Parsonage,and the ladies all felt that he must add considerably to the pleasuresof their engagements at Rosings. It was some days, however, before theyreceived any invitation thither--for while there were visitors in thehouse, they could not be necessary; and it was not till Easter-day,almost a week after the gentlemen’s arrival, that they were honoured bysuch an attention, and then they were merely asked on leaving church tocome there in the evening. For the last week they had seen very littleof Lady Catherine or her daughter. Colonel Fitzwilliam had called at theParsonage more than once during the time, but Mr. Darcy they had seenonly at church.The invitation was accepted of course, and at a proper hour they joinedthe party in Lady Catherine’s drawing-room. Her ladyship receivedthem civilly, but it was plain that their company was by no means soacceptable as when she could get nobody else; and she was, in fact,almost engrossed by her nephews, speaking to them, especially to Darcy,much more than to any other person in the room.Colonel Fitzwilliam seemed really glad to see them; anything was awelcome relief to him at Rosings; and Mrs. Collins’s pretty friend hadmoreover caught his fancy very much. He now seated himself by her, andtalked so agreeably of Kent and Hertfordshire, of travelling and stayingat home, of new books and music, that Elizabeth had never been half sowell entertained in that room before; and they conversed with so muchspirit and flow, as to draw the attention of Lady Catherine herself,as well as of Mr. Darcy. _His_ eyes had been soon and repeatedly turnedtowards them with a look of curiosity; and that her ladyship, after awhile, shared the feeling, was more openly acknowledged, for she did notscruple to call out:“What is that you are saying, Fitzwilliam? What is it you are talkingof? What are you telling Miss Bennet? Let me hear what it is.”“We are speaking of music, madam,” said he, when no longer able to avoida reply.“Of music! Then pray speak aloud. It is of all subjects my delight. Imust have my share in the conversation if you are speaking of music.There are few people in England, I suppose, who have more true enjoymentof music than myself, or a better natural taste. If I had ever learnt,I should have been a great proficient. And so would Anne, if her healthhad allowed her to apply. I am confident that she would have performeddelightfully. How does Georgiana get on, Darcy?”Mr. Darcy spoke with affectionate praise of his sister’s proficiency.“I am very glad to hear such a good account of her,” said LadyCatherine; “and pray tell her from me, that she cannot expect to excelif she does not practice a good deal.”“I assure you, madam,” he replied, “that she does not need such advice.She practises very constantly.”“So much the better. It cannot be done too much; and when I next writeto her, I shall charge her not to neglect it on any account. I oftentell young ladies that no excellence in music is to be acquired withoutconstant practice. I have told Miss Bennet several times, that shewill never play really well unless she practises more; and though Mrs.Collins has no instrument, she is very welcome, as I have often toldher, to come to Rosings every day, and play on the pianoforte in Mrs.Jenkinson’s room. She would be in nobody’s way, you know, in that partof the house.”Mr. Darcy looked a little ashamed of his aunt’s ill-breeding, and madeno answer.When coffee was over, Colonel Fitzwilliam reminded Elizabeth of havingpromised to play to him; and she sat down directly to the instrument. Hedrew a chair near her. Lady Catherine listened to half a song, and thentalked, as before, to her other nephew; till the latter walked awayfrom her, and making with his usual deliberation towards the pianofortestationed himself so as to command a full view of the fair performer’scountenance. Elizabeth saw what he was doing, and at the firstconvenient pause, turned to him with an arch smile, and said:“You mean to frighten me, Mr. Darcy, by coming in all this state to hearme? I will not be alarmed though your sister _does_ play so well. Thereis a stubbornness about me that never can bear to be frightened at thewill of others. My courage always rises at every attempt to intimidateme.”“I shall not say you are mistaken,” he replied, “because you could notreally believe me to entertain any design of alarming you; and I havehad the pleasure of your acquaintance long enough to know that you findgreat enjoyment in occasionally professing opinions which in fact arenot your own.”Elizabeth laughed heartily at this picture of herself, and said toColonel Fitzwilliam, “Your cousin will give you a very pretty notion ofme, and teach you not to believe a word I say. I am particularly unluckyin meeting with a person so able to expose my real character, in a partof the world where I had hoped to pass myself off with some degree ofcredit. Indeed, Mr. Darcy, it is very ungenerous in you to mention allthat you knew to my disadvantage in Hertfordshire--and, give me leave tosay, very impolitic too--for it is provoking me to retaliate, and suchthings may come out as will shock your relations to hear.”“I am not afraid of you,” said he, smilingly.“Pray let me hear what you have to accuse him of,” cried ColonelFitzwilliam. “I should like to know how he behaves among strangers.”“You shall hear then--but prepare yourself for something very dreadful.The first time of my ever seeing him in Hertfordshire, you must know,was at a ball--and at this ball, what do you think he did? He dancedonly four dances, though gentlemen were scarce; and, to my certainknowledge, more than one young lady was sitting down in want of apartner. Mr. Darcy, you cannot deny the fact.”“I had not at that time the honour of knowing any lady in the assemblybeyond my own party.”“True; and nobody can ever be introduced in a ball-room. Well, ColonelFitzwilliam, what do I play next? My fingers wait your orders.”“Perhaps,” said Darcy, “I should have judged better, had I sought anintroduction; but I am ill-qualified to recommend myself to strangers.”“Shall we ask your cousin the reason of this?” said Elizabeth, stilladdressing Colonel Fitzwilliam. “Shall we ask him why a man of sense andeducation, and who has lived in the world, is ill qualified to recommendhimself to strangers?”“I can answer your question,” said Fitzwilliam, “without applying tohim. It is because he will not give himself the trouble.”“I certainly have not the talent which some people possess,” said Darcy,“of conversing easily with those I have never seen before. I cannotcatch their tone of conversation, or appear interested in theirconcerns, as I often see done.”“My fingers,” said Elizabeth, “do not move over this instrument in themasterly manner which I see so many women’s do. They have not the sameforce or rapidity, and do not produce the same expression. But then Ihave always supposed it to be my own fault--because I will not take thetrouble of practising. It is not that I do not believe _my_ fingers ascapable as any other woman’s of superior execution.”Darcy smiled and said, “You are perfectly right. You have employed yourtime much better. No one admitted to the privilege of hearing you canthink anything wanting. We neither of us perform to strangers.”Here they were interrupted by Lady Catherine, who called out to knowwhat they were talking of. Elizabeth immediately began playing again.Lady Catherine approached, and, after listening for a few minutes, saidto Darcy:“Miss Bennet would not play at all amiss if she practised more, andcould have the advantage of a London master. She has a very good notionof fingering, though her taste is not equal to Anne’s. Anne would havebeen a delightful performer, had her health allowed her to learn.”Elizabeth looked at Darcy to see how cordially he assented to hiscousin’s praise; but neither at that moment nor at any other could shediscern any symptom of love; and from the whole of his behaviour to Missde Bourgh she derived this comfort for Miss Bingley, that he might havebeen just as likely to marry _her_, had she been his relation.Lady Catherine continued her remarks on Elizabeth’s performance, mixingwith them many instructions on execution and taste. Elizabeth receivedthem with all the forbearance of civility, and, at the request of thegentlemen, remained at the instrument till her ladyship’s carriage wasready to take them all home.Chapter 32Elizabeth was sitting by herself the next morning, and writing to Janewhile Mrs. Collins and Maria were gone on business into the village,when she was startled by a ring at the door, the certain signal of avisitor. As she had heard no carriage, she thought it not unlikely tobe Lady Catherine, and under that apprehension was putting away herhalf-finished letter that she might escape all impertinent questions,when the door opened, and, to her very great surprise, Mr. Darcy, andMr. Darcy only, entered the room.He seemed astonished too on finding her alone, and apologised for hisintrusion by letting her know that he had understood all the ladies wereto be within.They then sat down, and when her inquiries after Rosings were made,seemed in danger of sinking into total silence. It was absolutelynecessary, therefore, to think of something, and in this emergencerecollecting _when_ she had seen him last in Hertfordshire, andfeeling curious to know what he would say on the subject of their hastydeparture, she observed:“How very suddenly you all quitted Netherfield last November, Mr. Darcy!It must have been a most agreeable surprise to Mr. Bingley to see youall after him so soon; for, if I recollect right, he went but the daybefore. He and his sisters were well, I hope, when you left London?”“Perfectly so, I thank you.”She found that she was to receive no other answer, and, after a shortpause added:“I think I have understood that Mr. Bingley has not much idea of everreturning to Netherfield again?”“I have never heard him say so; but it is probable that he may spendvery little of his time there in the future. He has many friends, andis at a time of life when friends and engagements are continuallyincreasing.”“If he means to be but little at Netherfield, it would be better forthe neighbourhood that he should give up the place entirely, for then wemight possibly get a settled family there. But, perhaps, Mr. Bingley didnot take the house so much for the convenience of the neighbourhood asfor his own, and we must expect him to keep it or quit it on the sameprinciple.”“I should not be surprised,” said Darcy, “if he were to give it up assoon as any eligible purchase offers.”Elizabeth made no answer. She was afraid of talking longer of hisfriend; and, having nothing else to say, was now determined to leave thetrouble of finding a subject to him.He took the hint, and soon began with, “This seems a very comfortablehouse. Lady Catherine, I believe, did a great deal to it when Mr.Collins first came to Hunsford.”“I believe she did--and I am sure she could not have bestowed herkindness on a more grateful object.”“Mr. Collins appears to be very fortunate in his choice of a wife.”“Yes, indeed, his friends may well rejoice in his having met with oneof the very few sensible women who would have accepted him, or have madehim happy if they had. My friend has an excellent understanding--thoughI am not certain that I consider her marrying Mr. Collins as thewisest thing she ever did. She seems perfectly happy, however, and in aprudential light it is certainly a very good match for her.”“It must be very agreeable for her to be settled within so easy adistance of her own family and friends.”“An easy distance, do you call it? It is nearly fifty miles.”“And what is fifty miles of good road? Little more than half a day’sjourney. Yes, I call it a _very_ easy distance.”“I should never have considered the distance as one of the _advantages_of the match,” cried Elizabeth. “I should never have said Mrs. Collinswas settled _near_ her family.”“It is a proof of your own attachment to Hertfordshire. Anything beyondthe very neighbourhood of Longbourn, I suppose, would appear far.”As he spoke there was a sort of smile which Elizabeth fancied sheunderstood; he must be supposing her to be thinking of Jane andNetherfield, and she blushed as she answered:“I do not mean to say that a woman may not be settled too near herfamily. The far and the near must be relative, and depend on manyvarying circumstances. Where there is fortune to make the expenses oftravelling unimportant, distance becomes no evil. But that is not thecase _here_. Mr. and Mrs. Collins have a comfortable income, but notsuch a one as will allow of frequent journeys--and I am persuaded myfriend would not call herself _near_ her family under less than _half_the present distance.”Mr. Darcy drew his chair a little towards her, and said, “_You_ cannothave a right to such very strong local attachment. _You_ cannot havebeen always at Longbourn.”Elizabeth looked surprised. The gentleman experienced some change offeeling; he drew back his chair, took a newspaper from the table, andglancing over it, said, in a colder voice:“Are you pleased with Kent?”A short dialogue on the subject of the country ensued, on either sidecalm and concise--and soon put an end to by the entrance of Charlotteand her sister, just returned from her walk. The tete-a-tete surprisedthem. Mr. Darcy related the mistake which had occasioned his intrudingon Miss Bennet, and after sitting a few minutes longer without sayingmuch to anybody, went away.“What can be the meaning of this?” said Charlotte, as soon as he wasgone. “My dear, Eliza, he must be in love with you, or he would neverhave called us in this familiar way.”But when Elizabeth told of his silence, it did not seem very likely,even to Charlotte’s wishes, to be the case; and after variousconjectures, they could at last only suppose his visit to proceed fromthe difficulty of finding anything to do, which was the more probablefrom the time of year. All field sports were over. Within doors therewas Lady Catherine, books, and a billiard-table, but gentlemen cannotalways be within doors; and in the nearness of the Parsonage, or thepleasantness of the walk to it, or of the people who lived in it, thetwo cousins found a temptation from this period of walking thitheralmost every day. They called at various times of the morning, sometimesseparately, sometimes together, and now and then accompanied by theiraunt. It was plain to them all that Colonel Fitzwilliam came because hehad pleasure in their society, a persuasion which of course recommendedhim still more; and Elizabeth was reminded by her own satisfaction inbeing with him, as well as by his evident admiration of her, of herformer favourite George Wickham; and though, in comparing them, she sawthere was less captivating softness in Colonel Fitzwilliam’s manners,she believed he might have the best informed mind.But why Mr. Darcy came so often to the Parsonage, it was more difficultto understand. It could not be for society, as he frequently sat thereten minutes together without opening his lips; and when he did speak,it seemed the effect of necessity rather than of choice--a sacrificeto propriety, not a pleasure to himself. He seldom appeared reallyanimated. Mrs. Collins knew not what to make of him. ColonelFitzwilliam’s occasionally laughing at his stupidity, proved that he wasgenerally different, which her own knowledge of him could not have toldher; and as she would liked to have believed this change the effectof love, and the object of that love her friend Eliza, she set herselfseriously to work to find it out. She watched him whenever they were atRosings, and whenever he came to Hunsford; but without much success. Hecertainly looked at her friend a great deal, but the expression of thatlook was disputable. It was an earnest, steadfast gaze, but she oftendoubted whether there were much admiration in it, and sometimes itseemed nothing but absence of mind.She had once or twice suggested to Elizabeth the possibility of hisbeing partial to her, but Elizabeth always laughed at the idea; and Mrs.Collins did not think it right to press the subject, from the danger ofraising expectations which might only end in disappointment; for in heropinion it admitted not of a doubt, that all her friend’s dislike wouldvanish, if she could suppose him to be in her power.In her kind schemes for Elizabeth, she sometimes planned her marryingColonel Fitzwilliam. He was beyond comparison the most pleasant man; hecertainly admired her, and his situation in life was most eligible; but,to counterbalance these advantages, Mr. Darcy had considerable patronagein the church, and his cousin could have none at all.Chapter 33More than once did Elizabeth, in her ramble within the park,unexpectedly meet Mr. Darcy. She felt all the perverseness of themischance that should bring him where no one else was brought, and, toprevent its ever happening again, took care to inform him at first thatit was a favourite haunt of hers. How it could occur a second time,therefore, was very odd! Yet it did, and even a third. It seemed likewilful ill-nature, or a voluntary penance, for on these occasions it wasnot merely a few formal inquiries and an awkward pause and then away,but he actually thought it necessary to turn back and walk with her. Henever said a great deal, nor did she give herself the trouble of talkingor of listening much; but it struck her in the course of their thirdrencontre that he was asking some odd unconnected questions--abouther pleasure in being at Hunsford, her love of solitary walks, and heropinion of Mr. and Mrs. Collins’s happiness; and that in speaking ofRosings and her not perfectly understanding the house, he seemed toexpect that whenever she came into Kent again she would be staying_there_ too. His words seemed to imply it. Could he have ColonelFitzwilliam in his thoughts? She supposed, if he meant anything, he mustmean an allusion to what might arise in that quarter. It distressedher a little, and she was quite glad to find herself at the gate in thepales opposite the Parsonage.She was engaged one day as she walked, in perusing Jane’s last letter,and dwelling on some passages which proved that Jane had not written inspirits, when, instead of being again surprised by Mr. Darcy, she sawon looking up that Colonel Fitzwilliam was meeting her. Putting away theletter immediately and forcing a smile, she said:“I did not know before that you ever walked this way.”“I have been making the tour of the park,” he replied, “as I generallydo every year, and intend to close it with a call at the Parsonage. Areyou going much farther?”“No, I should have turned in a moment.”And accordingly she did turn, and they walked towards the Parsonagetogether.“Do you certainly leave Kent on Saturday?” said she.“Yes--if Darcy does not put it off again. But I am at his disposal. Hearranges the business just as he pleases.”“And if not able to please himself in the arrangement, he has at leastpleasure in the great power of choice. I do not know anybody who seemsmore to enjoy the power of doing what he likes than Mr. Darcy.”“He likes to have his own way very well,” replied Colonel Fitzwilliam.“But so we all do. It is only that he has better means of having itthan many others, because he is rich, and many others are poor. I speakfeelingly. A younger son, you know, must be inured to self-denial anddependence.”“In my opinion, the younger son of an earl can know very little ofeither. Now seriously, what have you ever known of self-denial anddependence? When have you been prevented by want of money from goingwherever you chose, or procuring anything you had a fancy for?”“These are home questions--and perhaps I cannot say that I haveexperienced many hardships of that nature. But in matters of greaterweight, I may suffer from want of money. Younger sons cannot marry wherethey like.”“Unless where they like women of fortune, which I think they very oftendo.”“Our habits of expense make us too dependent, and there are not manyin my rank of life who can afford to marry without some attention tomoney.”“Is this,” thought Elizabeth, “meant for me?” and she coloured at theidea; but, recovering herself, said in a lively tone, “And pray, whatis the usual price of an earl’s younger son? Unless the elder brother isvery sickly, I suppose you would not ask above fifty thousand pounds.”He answered her in the same style, and the subject dropped. To interrupta silence which might make him fancy her affected with what had passed,she soon afterwards said:“I imagine your cousin brought you down with him chiefly for the sake ofhaving someone at his disposal. I wonder he does not marry, to secure alasting convenience of that kind. But, perhaps, his sister does as wellfor the present, and, as she is under his sole care, he may do what helikes with her.”“No,” said Colonel Fitzwilliam, “that is an advantage which he mustdivide with me. I am joined with him in the guardianship of Miss Darcy.”“Are you indeed? And pray what sort of guardians do you make? Does yourcharge give you much trouble? Young ladies of her age are sometimes alittle difficult to manage, and if she has the true Darcy spirit, shemay like to have her own way.”As she spoke she observed him looking at her earnestly; and the mannerin which he immediately asked her why she supposed Miss Darcy likely togive them any uneasiness, convinced her that she had somehow or othergot pretty near the truth. She directly replied:“You need not be frightened. I never heard any harm of her; and I daresay she is one of the most tractable creatures in the world. She is avery great favourite with some ladies of my acquaintance, Mrs. Hurst andMiss Bingley. I think I have heard you say that you know them.”“I know them a little. Their brother is a pleasant gentlemanlike man--heis a great friend of Darcy’s.”“Oh! yes,” said Elizabeth drily; “Mr. Darcy is uncommonly kind to Mr.Bingley, and takes a prodigious deal of care of him.”“Care of him! Yes, I really believe Darcy _does_ take care of him inthose points where he most wants care. From something that he told me inour journey hither, I have reason to think Bingley very much indebted tohim. But I ought to beg his pardon, for I have no right to suppose thatBingley was the person meant. It was all conjecture.”“What is it you mean?”“It is a circumstance which Darcy could not wish to be generally known,because if it were to get round to the lady’s family, it would be anunpleasant thing.”“You may depend upon my not mentioning it.”“And remember that I have not much reason for supposing it to beBingley. What he told me was merely this: that he congratulated himselfon having lately saved a friend from the inconveniences of a mostimprudent marriage, but without mentioning names or any otherparticulars, and I only suspected it to be Bingley from believinghim the kind of young man to get into a scrape of that sort, and fromknowing them to have been together the whole of last summer.”“Did Mr. Darcy give you reasons for this interference?”“I understood that there were some very strong objections against thelady.”“And what arts did he use to separate them?”“He did not talk to me of his own arts,” said Fitzwilliam, smiling. “Heonly told me what I have now told you.”Elizabeth made no answer, and walked on, her heart swelling withindignation. After watching her a little, Fitzwilliam asked her why shewas so thoughtful.“I am thinking of what you have been telling me,” said she. “Yourcousin’s conduct does not suit my feelings. Why was he to be the judge?”“You are rather disposed to call his interference officious?”“I do not see what right Mr. Darcy had to decide on the propriety of hisfriend’s inclination, or why, upon his own judgement alone, he was todetermine and direct in what manner his friend was to be happy.But,” she continued, recollecting herself, “as we know none of theparticulars, it is not fair to condemn him. It is not to be supposedthat there was much affection in the case.”“That is not an unnatural surmise,” said Fitzwilliam, “but it is alessening of the honour of my cousin’s triumph very sadly.”This was spoken jestingly; but it appeared to her so just a pictureof Mr. Darcy, that she would not trust herself with an answer, andtherefore, abruptly changing the conversation talked on indifferentmatters until they reached the Parsonage. There, shut into her own room,as soon as their visitor left them, she could think without interruptionof all that she had heard. It was not to be supposed that any otherpeople could be meant than those with whom she was connected. Therecould not exist in the world _two_ men over whom Mr. Darcy could havesuch boundless influence. That he had been concerned in the measurestaken to separate Bingley and Jane she had never doubted; but she hadalways attributed to Miss Bingley the principal design and arrangementof them. If his own vanity, however, did not mislead him, _he_ wasthe cause, his pride and caprice were the cause, of all that Jane hadsuffered, and still continued to suffer. He had ruined for a whileevery hope of happiness for the most affectionate, generous heart in theworld; and no one could say how lasting an evil he might have inflicted.“There were some very strong objections against the lady,” were ColonelFitzwilliam’s words; and those strong objections probably were, herhaving one uncle who was a country attorney, and another who was inbusiness in London.“To Jane herself,” she exclaimed, “there could be no possibility ofobjection; all loveliness and goodness as she is!--her understandingexcellent, her mind improved, and her manners captivating. Neithercould anything be urged against my father, who, though with somepeculiarities, has abilities Mr. Darcy himself need not disdain, andrespectability which he will probably never reach.” When she thought ofher mother, her confidence gave way a little; but she would not allowthat any objections _there_ had material weight with Mr. Darcy, whosepride, she was convinced, would receive a deeper wound from the want ofimportance in his friend’s connections, than from their want of sense;and she was quite decided, at last, that he had been partly governedby this worst kind of pride, and partly by the wish of retaining Mr.Bingley for his sister.The agitation and tears which the subject occasioned, brought on aheadache; and it grew so much worse towards the evening, that, added toher unwillingness to see Mr. Darcy, it determined her not to attend hercousins to Rosings, where they were engaged to drink tea. Mrs. Collins,seeing that she was really unwell, did not press her to go and as muchas possible prevented her husband from pressing her; but Mr. Collinscould not conceal his apprehension of Lady Catherine’s being ratherdispleased by her staying at home.Chapter 34When they were gone, Elizabeth, as if intending to exasperate herselfas much as possible against Mr. Darcy, chose for her employment theexamination of all the letters which Jane had written to her since herbeing in Kent. They contained no actual complaint, nor was there anyrevival of past occurrences, or any communication of present suffering.But in all, and in almost every line of each, there was a want of thatcheerfulness which had been used to characterise her style, and which,proceeding from the serenity of a mind at ease with itself and kindlydisposed towards everyone, had been scarcely ever clouded. Elizabethnoticed every sentence conveying the idea of uneasiness, with anattention which it had hardly received on the first perusal. Mr. Darcy’sshameful boast of what misery he had been able to inflict, gave hera keener sense of her sister’s sufferings. It was some consolationto think that his visit to Rosings was to end on the day after thenext--and, a still greater, that in less than a fortnight she shouldherself be with Jane again, and enabled to contribute to the recovery ofher spirits, by all that affection could do.She could not think of Darcy’s leaving Kent without remembering thathis cousin was to go with him; but Colonel Fitzwilliam had made it clearthat he had no intentions at all, and agreeable as he was, she did notmean to be unhappy about him.While settling this point, she was suddenly roused by the sound of thedoor-bell, and her spirits were a little fluttered by the idea of itsbeing Colonel Fitzwilliam himself, who had once before called late inthe evening, and might now come to inquire particularly after her.But this idea was soon banished, and her spirits were very differentlyaffected, when, to her utter amazement, she saw Mr. Darcy walk into theroom. In an hurried manner he immediately began an inquiry after herhealth, imputing his visit to a wish of hearing that she were better.She answered him with cold civility. He sat down for a few moments, andthen getting up, walked about the room. Elizabeth was surprised, butsaid not a word. After a silence of several minutes, he came towards herin an agitated manner, and thus began:“In vain I have struggled. It will not do. My feelings will not berepressed. You must allow me to tell you how ardently I admire and loveyou.”Elizabeth’s astonishment was beyond expression. She stared, coloured,doubted, and was silent. This he considered sufficient encouragement;and the avowal of all that he felt, and had long felt for her,immediately followed. He spoke well; but there were feelings besidesthose of the heart to be detailed; and he was not more eloquent on thesubject of tenderness than of pride. His sense of her inferiority--ofits being a degradation--of the family obstacles which had alwaysopposed to inclination, were dwelt on with a warmth which seemed due tothe consequence he was wounding, but was very unlikely to recommend hissuit.In spite of her deeply-rooted dislike, she could not be insensible tothe compliment of such a man’s affection, and though her intentions didnot vary for an instant, she was at first sorry for the pain he was toreceive; till, roused to resentment by his subsequent language, shelost all compassion in anger. She tried, however, to compose herself toanswer him with patience, when he should have done. He concluded withrepresenting to her the strength of that attachment which, in spiteof all his endeavours, he had found impossible to conquer; and withexpressing his hope that it would now be rewarded by her acceptance ofhis hand. As he said this, she could easily see that he had no doubtof a favourable answer. He _spoke_ of apprehension and anxiety, buthis countenance expressed real security. Such a circumstance couldonly exasperate farther, and, when he ceased, the colour rose into hercheeks, and she said:“In such cases as this, it is, I believe, the established mode toexpress a sense of obligation for the sentiments avowed, howeverunequally they may be returned. It is natural that obligation shouldbe felt, and if I could _feel_ gratitude, I would now thank you. But Icannot--I have never desired your good opinion, and you have certainlybestowed it most unwillingly. I am sorry to have occasioned pain toanyone. It has been most unconsciously done, however, and I hope will beof short duration. The feelings which, you tell me, have long preventedthe acknowledgment of your regard, can have little difficulty inovercoming it after this explanation.”Mr. Darcy, who was leaning against the mantelpiece with his eyes fixedon her face, seemed to catch her words with no less resentment thansurprise. His complexion became pale with anger, and the disturbanceof his mind was visible in every feature. He was struggling for theappearance of composure, and would not open his lips till he believedhimself to have attained it. The pause was to Elizabeth’s feelingsdreadful. At length, with a voice of forced calmness, he said:“And this is all the reply which I am to have the honour of expecting!I might, perhaps, wish to be informed why, with so little _endeavour_ atcivility, I am thus rejected. But it is of small importance.”“I might as well inquire,” replied she, “why with so evident a desireof offending and insulting me, you chose to tell me that you liked meagainst your will, against your reason, and even against your character?Was not this some excuse for incivility, if I _was_ uncivil? But I haveother provocations. You know I have. Had not my feelings decided againstyou--had they been indifferent, or had they even been favourable, do youthink that any consideration would tempt me to accept the man who hasbeen the means of ruining, perhaps for ever, the happiness of a mostbeloved sister?”As she pronounced these words, Mr. Darcy changed colour; but the emotionwas short, and he listened without attempting to interrupt her while shecontinued:“I have every reason in the world to think ill of you. No motive canexcuse the unjust and ungenerous part you acted _there_. You dare not,you cannot deny, that you have been the principal, if not the only meansof dividing them from each other--of exposing one to the censure of theworld for caprice and instability, and the other to its derision fordisappointed hopes, and involving them both in misery of the acutestkind.”She paused, and saw with no slight indignation that he was listeningwith an air which proved him wholly unmoved by any feeling of remorse.He even looked at her with a smile of affected incredulity.“Can you deny that you have done it?” she repeated.With assumed tranquillity he then replied: “I have no wish of denyingthat I did everything in my power to separate my friend from yoursister, or that I rejoice in my success. Towards _him_ I have beenkinder than towards myself.”Elizabeth disdained the appearance of noticing this civil reflection,but its meaning did not escape, nor was it likely to conciliate her.“But it is not merely this affair,” she continued, “on which my dislikeis founded. Long before it had taken place my opinion of you wasdecided. Your character was unfolded in the recital which I receivedmany months ago from Mr. Wickham. On this subject, what can you have tosay? In what imaginary act of friendship can you here defend yourself?or under what misrepresentation can you here impose upon others?”“You take an eager interest in that gentleman’s concerns,” said Darcy,in a less tranquil tone, and with a heightened colour.“Who that knows what his misfortunes have been, can help feeling aninterest in him?”“His misfortunes!” repeated Darcy contemptuously; “yes, his misfortuneshave been great indeed.”“And of your infliction,” cried Elizabeth with energy. “You have reducedhim to his present state of poverty--comparative poverty. You havewithheld the advantages which you must know to have been designed forhim. You have deprived the best years of his life of that independencewhich was no less his due than his desert. You have done all this!and yet you can treat the mention of his misfortune with contempt andridicule.”“And this,” cried Darcy, as he walked with quick steps across the room,“is your opinion of me! This is the estimation in which you hold me!I thank you for explaining it so fully. My faults, according to thiscalculation, are heavy indeed! But perhaps,” added he, stopping inhis walk, and turning towards her, “these offenses might have beenoverlooked, had not your pride been hurt by my honest confession of thescruples that had long prevented my forming any serious design. Thesebitter accusations might have been suppressed, had I, with greaterpolicy, concealed my struggles, and flattered you into the belief ofmy being impelled by unqualified, unalloyed inclination; by reason, byreflection, by everything. But disguise of every sort is my abhorrence.Nor am I ashamed of the feelings I related. They were natural andjust. Could you expect me to rejoice in the inferiority of yourconnections?--to congratulate myself on the hope of relations, whosecondition in life is so decidedly beneath my own?”Elizabeth felt herself growing more angry every moment; yet she tried tothe utmost to speak with composure when she said:“You are mistaken, Mr. Darcy, if you suppose that the mode of yourdeclaration affected me in any other way, than as it spared me the concernwhich I might have felt in refusing you, had you behaved in a moregentlemanlike manner.”She saw him start at this, but he said nothing, and she continued:“You could not have made the offer of your hand in any possible way thatwould have tempted me to accept it.”Again his astonishment was obvious; and he looked at her with anexpression of mingled incredulity and mortification. She went on:“From the very beginning--from the first moment, I may almost say--ofmy acquaintance with you, your manners, impressing me with the fullestbelief of your arrogance, your conceit, and your selfish disdain ofthe feelings of others, were such as to form the groundwork ofdisapprobation on which succeeding events have built so immovable adislike; and I had not known you a month before I felt that you were thelast man in the world whom I could ever be prevailed on to marry.”“You have said quite enough, madam. I perfectly comprehend yourfeelings, and have now only to be ashamed of what my own have been.Forgive me for having taken up so much of your time, and accept my bestwishes for your health and happiness.”And with these words he hastily left the room, and Elizabeth heard himthe next moment open the front door and quit the house.The tumult of her mind, was now painfully great. She knew not howto support herself, and from actual weakness sat down and cried forhalf-an-hour. Her astonishment, as she reflected on what had passed,was increased by every review of it. That she should receive an offer ofmarriage from Mr. Darcy! That he should have been in love with her forso many months! So much in love as to wish to marry her in spite ofall the objections which had made him prevent his friend’s marryingher sister, and which must appear at least with equal force in hisown case--was almost incredible! It was gratifying to have inspiredunconsciously so strong an affection. But his pride, his abominablepride--his shameless avowal of what he had done with respect toJane--his unpardonable assurance in acknowledging, though he couldnot justify it, and the unfeeling manner in which he had mentioned Mr.Wickham, his cruelty towards whom he had not attempted to deny, soonovercame the pity which the consideration of his attachment had fora moment excited. She continued in very agitated reflections till thesound of Lady Catherine’s carriage made her feel how unequal she was toencounter Charlotte’s observation, and hurried her away to her room.Chapter 35Elizabeth awoke the next morning to the same thoughts and meditationswhich had at length closed her eyes. She could not yet recover from thesurprise of what had happened; it was impossible to think of anythingelse; and, totally indisposed for employment, she resolved, soon afterbreakfast, to indulge herself in air and exercise. She was proceedingdirectly to her favourite walk, when the recollection of Mr. Darcy’ssometimes coming there stopped her, and instead of entering the park,she turned up the lane, which led farther from the turnpike-road. Thepark paling was still the boundary on one side, and she soon passed oneof the gates into the ground.After walking two or three times along that part of the lane, she wastempted, by the pleasantness of the morning, to stop at the gates andlook into the park. The five weeks which she had now passed in Kent hadmade a great difference in the country, and every day was adding to theverdure of the early trees. She was on the point of continuing her walk,when she caught a glimpse of a gentleman within the sort of grove whichedged the park; he was moving that way; and, fearful of its being Mr.Darcy, she was directly retreating. But the person who advanced was nownear enough to see her, and stepping forward with eagerness, pronouncedher name. She had turned away; but on hearing herself called, thoughin a voice which proved it to be Mr. Darcy, she moved again towards thegate. He had by that time reached it also, and, holding out a letter,which she instinctively took, said, with a look of haughty composure,“I have been walking in the grove some time in the hope of meeting you.Will you do me the honour of reading that letter?” And then, with aslight bow, turned again into the plantation, and was soon out of sight.With no expectation of pleasure, but with the strongest curiosity,Elizabeth opened the letter, and, to her still increasing wonder,perceived an envelope containing two sheets of letter-paper, writtenquite through, in a very close hand. The envelope itself was likewisefull. Pursuing her way along the lane, she then began it. It was datedfrom Rosings, at eight o’clock in the morning, and was as follows:--“Be not alarmed, madam, on receiving this letter, by the apprehensionof its containing any repetition of those sentiments or renewal of thoseoffers which were last night so disgusting to you. I write without anyintention of paining you, or humbling myself, by dwelling on wisheswhich, for the happiness of both, cannot be too soon forgotten; and theeffort which the formation and the perusal of this letter must occasion,should have been spared, had not my character required it to be writtenand read. You must, therefore, pardon the freedom with which I demandyour attention; your feelings, I know, will bestow it unwillingly, but Idemand it of your justice.“Two offenses of a very different nature, and by no means of equalmagnitude, you last night laid to my charge. The first mentioned was,that, regardless of the sentiments of either, I had detached Mr. Bingleyfrom your sister, and the other, that I had, in defiance of variousclaims, in defiance of honour and humanity, ruined the immediateprosperity and blasted the prospects of Mr. Wickham. Wilfully andwantonly to have thrown off the companion of my youth, the acknowledgedfavourite of my father, a young man who had scarcely any otherdependence than on our patronage, and who had been brought up to expectits exertion, would be a depravity, to which the separation of two youngpersons, whose affection could be the growth of only a few weeks, couldbear no comparison. But from the severity of that blame which was lastnight so liberally bestowed, respecting each circumstance, I shall hopeto be in the future secured, when the following account of my actionsand their motives has been read. If, in the explanation of them, whichis due to myself, I am under the necessity of relating feelings whichmay be offensive to yours, I can only say that I am sorry. The necessitymust be obeyed, and further apology would be absurd.“I had not been long in Hertfordshire, before I saw, in common withothers, that Bingley preferred your elder sister to any other youngwoman in the country. But it was not till the evening of the danceat Netherfield that I had any apprehension of his feeling a seriousattachment. I had often seen him in love before. At that ball, while Ihad the honour of dancing with you, I was first made acquainted, by SirWilliam Lucas’s accidental information, that Bingley’s attentions toyour sister had given rise to a general expectation of their marriage.He spoke of it as a certain event, of which the time alone couldbe undecided. From that moment I observed my friend’s behaviourattentively; and I could then perceive that his partiality for MissBennet was beyond what I had ever witnessed in him. Your sister I alsowatched. Her look and manners were open, cheerful, and engaging as ever,but without any symptom of peculiar regard, and I remained convincedfrom the evening’s scrutiny, that though she received his attentionswith pleasure, she did not invite them by any participation ofsentiment. If _you_ have not been mistaken here, _I_ must have beenin error. Your superior knowledge of your sister must make the latterprobable. If it be so, if I have been misled by such error to inflictpain on her, your resentment has not been unreasonable. But I shall notscruple to assert, that the serenity of your sister’s countenance andair was such as might have given the most acute observer a convictionthat, however amiable her temper, her heart was not likely to beeasily touched. That I was desirous of believing her indifferent iscertain--but I will venture to say that my investigation and decisionsare not usually influenced by my hopes or fears. I did not believeher to be indifferent because I wished it; I believed it on impartialconviction, as truly as I wished it in reason. My objections to themarriage were not merely those which I last night acknowledged to havethe utmost force of passion to put aside, in my own case; the want ofconnection could not be so great an evil to my friend as to me. Butthere were other causes of repugnance; causes which, though stillexisting, and existing to an equal degree in both instances, I hadmyself endeavoured to forget, because they were not immediately beforeme. These causes must be stated, though briefly. The situation of yourmother’s family, though objectionable, was nothing in comparison to thattotal want of propriety so frequently, so almost uniformly betrayed byherself, by your three younger sisters, and occasionally even by yourfather. Pardon me. It pains me to offend you. But amidst your concernfor the defects of your nearest relations, and your displeasure at thisrepresentation of them, let it give you consolation to consider that, tohave conducted yourselves so as to avoid any share of the like censure,is praise no less generally bestowed on you and your elder sister, thanit is honourable to the sense and disposition of both. I will only sayfarther that from what passed that evening, my opinion of all partieswas confirmed, and every inducement heightened which could have ledme before, to preserve my friend from what I esteemed a most unhappyconnection. He left Netherfield for London, on the day following, asyou, I am certain, remember, with the design of soon returning.“The part which I acted is now to be explained. His sisters’ uneasinesshad been equally excited with my own; our coincidence of feeling wassoon discovered, and, alike sensible that no time was to be lost indetaching their brother, we shortly resolved on joining him directly inLondon. We accordingly went--and there I readily engaged in the officeof pointing out to my friend the certain evils of such a choice. Idescribed, and enforced them earnestly. But, however this remonstrancemight have staggered or delayed his determination, I do not supposethat it would ultimately have prevented the marriage, had it not beenseconded by the assurance that I hesitated not in giving, of yoursister’s indifference. He had before believed her to return hisaffection with sincere, if not with equal regard. But Bingley has greatnatural modesty, with a stronger dependence on my judgement than on hisown. To convince him, therefore, that he had deceived himself, wasno very difficult point. To persuade him against returning intoHertfordshire, when that conviction had been given, was scarcely thework of a moment. I cannot blame myself for having done thus much. Thereis but one part of my conduct in the whole affair on which I do notreflect with satisfaction; it is that I condescended to adopt themeasures of art so far as to conceal from him your sister’s being intown. I knew it myself, as it was known to Miss Bingley; but herbrother is even yet ignorant of it. That they might have met withoutill consequence is perhaps probable; but his regard did not appear to meenough extinguished for him to see her without some danger. Perhaps thisconcealment, this disguise was beneath me; it is done, however, and itwas done for the best. On this subject I have nothing more to say, noother apology to offer. If I have wounded your sister’s feelings, itwas unknowingly done and though the motives which governed me may toyou very naturally appear insufficient, I have not yet learnt to condemnthem.“With respect to that other, more weighty accusation, of having injuredMr. Wickham, I can only refute it by laying before you the whole of hisconnection with my family. Of what he has _particularly_ accused me Iam ignorant; but of the truth of what I shall relate, I can summon morethan one witness of undoubted veracity.“Mr. Wickham is the son of a very respectable man, who had for manyyears the management of all the Pemberley estates, and whose goodconduct in the discharge of his trust naturally inclined my father tobe of service to him; and on George Wickham, who was his godson, hiskindness was therefore liberally bestowed. My father supported him atschool, and afterwards at Cambridge--most important assistance, as hisown father, always poor from the extravagance of his wife, would havebeen unable to give him a gentleman’s education. My father was not onlyfond of this young man’s society, whose manners were always engaging; hehad also the highest opinion of him, and hoping the church would behis profession, intended to provide for him in it. As for myself, it ismany, many years since I first began to think of him in a very differentmanner. The vicious propensities--the want of principle, which he wascareful to guard from the knowledge of his best friend, could not escapethe observation of a young man of nearly the same age with himself,and who had opportunities of seeing him in unguarded moments, which Mr.Darcy could not have. Here again I shall give you pain--to what degreeyou only can tell. But whatever may be the sentiments which Mr. Wickhamhas created, a suspicion of their nature shall not prevent me fromunfolding his real character--it adds even another motive.“My excellent father died about five years ago; and his attachment toMr. Wickham was to the last so steady, that in his will he particularlyrecommended it to me, to promote his advancement in the best mannerthat his profession might allow--and if he took orders, desired that avaluable family living might be his as soon as it became vacant. Therewas also a legacy of one thousand pounds. His own father did not longsurvive mine, and within half a year from these events, Mr. Wickhamwrote to inform me that, having finally resolved against taking orders,he hoped I should not think it unreasonable for him to expect some moreimmediate pecuniary advantage, in lieu of the preferment, by which hecould not be benefited. He had some intention, he added, of studyinglaw, and I must be aware that the interest of one thousand pounds wouldbe a very insufficient support therein. I rather wished, than believedhim to be sincere; but, at any rate, was perfectly ready to accede tohis proposal. I knew that Mr. Wickham ought not to be a clergyman; thebusiness was therefore soon settled--he resigned all claim to assistancein the church, were it possible that he could ever be in a situation toreceive it, and accepted in return three thousand pounds. All connectionbetween us seemed now dissolved. I thought too ill of him to invite himto Pemberley, or admit his society in town. In town I believe he chieflylived, but his studying the law was a mere pretence, and being now freefrom all restraint, his life was a life of idleness and dissipation.For about three years I heard little of him; but on the decease of theincumbent of the living which had been designed for him, he applied tome again by letter for the presentation. His circumstances, he assuredme, and I had no difficulty in believing it, were exceedingly bad. Hehad found the law a most unprofitable study, and was now absolutelyresolved on being ordained, if I would present him to the living inquestion--of which he trusted there could be little doubt, as he waswell assured that I had no other person to provide for, and I could nothave forgotten my revered father’s intentions. You will hardly blameme for refusing to comply with this entreaty, or for resisting everyrepetition to it. His resentment was in proportion to the distress ofhis circumstances--and he was doubtless as violent in his abuse of meto others as in his reproaches to myself. After this period everyappearance of acquaintance was dropped. How he lived I know not. Butlast summer he was again most painfully obtruded on my notice.“I must now mention a circumstance which I would wish to forget myself,and which no obligation less than the present should induce me to unfoldto any human being. Having said thus much, I feel no doubt of yoursecrecy. My sister, who is more than ten years my junior, was left tothe guardianship of my mother’s nephew, Colonel Fitzwilliam, and myself.About a year ago, she was taken from school, and an establishment formedfor her in London; and last summer she went with the lady who presidedover it, to Ramsgate; and thither also went Mr. Wickham, undoubtedly bydesign; for there proved to have been a prior acquaintance between himand Mrs. Younge, in whose character we were most unhappily deceived; andby her connivance and aid, he so far recommended himself to Georgiana,whose affectionate heart retained a strong impression of his kindness toher as a child, that she was persuaded to believe herself in love, andto consent to an elopement. She was then but fifteen, which must be herexcuse; and after stating her imprudence, I am happy to add, that I owedthe knowledge of it to herself. I joined them unexpectedly a day or twobefore the intended elopement, and then Georgiana, unable to support theidea of grieving and offending a brother whom she almost looked up to asa father, acknowledged the whole to me. You may imagine what I felt andhow I acted. Regard for my sister’s credit and feelings preventedany public exposure; but I wrote to Mr. Wickham, who left the placeimmediately, and Mrs. Younge was of course removed from her charge. Mr.Wickham’s chief object was unquestionably my sister’s fortune, whichis thirty thousand pounds; but I cannot help supposing that the hope ofrevenging himself on me was a strong inducement. His revenge would havebeen complete indeed.“This, madam, is a faithful narrative of every event in which we havebeen concerned together; and if you do not absolutely reject it asfalse, you will, I hope, acquit me henceforth of cruelty towards Mr.Wickham. I know not in what manner, under what form of falsehood hehad imposed on you; but his success is not perhaps to be wonderedat. Ignorant as you previously were of everything concerning either,detection could not be in your power, and suspicion certainly not inyour inclination.“You may possibly wonder why all this was not told you last night; butI was not then master enough of myself to know what could or ought tobe revealed. For the truth of everything here related, I can appeal moreparticularly to the testimony of Colonel Fitzwilliam, who, from ournear relationship and constant intimacy, and, still more, as one ofthe executors of my father’s will, has been unavoidably acquaintedwith every particular of these transactions. If your abhorrence of _me_should make _my_ assertions valueless, you cannot be prevented bythe same cause from confiding in my cousin; and that there may bethe possibility of consulting him, I shall endeavour to find someopportunity of putting this letter in your hands in the course of themorning. I will only add, God bless you.“FITZWILLIAM DARCY”If Elizabeth, when Mr. Darcy gave her the letter, did not expect it tocontain a renewal of his offers, she had formed no expectation at all ofits contents. But such as they were, it may well be supposed how eagerlyshe went through them, and what a contrariety of emotion they excited.Her feelings as she read were scarcely to be defined. With amazement didshe first understand that he believed any apology to be in his power;and steadfastly was she persuaded, that he could have no explanationto give, which a just sense of shame would not conceal. With a strongprejudice against everything he might say, she began his account of whathad happened at Netherfield. She read with an eagerness which hardlyleft her power of comprehension, and from impatience of knowing what thenext sentence might bring, was incapable of attending to the sense ofthe one before her eyes. His belief of her sister’s insensibility sheinstantly resolved to be false; and his account of the real, the worstobjections to the match, made her too angry to have any wish of doinghim justice. He expressed no regret for what he had done which satisfiedher; his style was not penitent, but haughty. It was all pride andinsolence.But when this subject was succeeded by his account of Mr. Wickham--whenshe read with somewhat clearer attention a relation of events which,if true, must overthrow every cherished opinion of his worth, and whichbore so alarming an affinity to his own history of himself--herfeelings were yet more acutely painful and more difficult of definition.Astonishment, apprehension, and even horror, oppressed her. She wishedto discredit it entirely, repeatedly exclaiming, “This must be false!This cannot be! This must be the grossest falsehood!”--and when she hadgone through the whole letter, though scarcely knowing anything of thelast page or two, put it hastily away, protesting that she would notregard it, that she would never look in it again.In this perturbed state of mind, with thoughts that could rest onnothing, she walked on; but it would not do; in half a minute the letterwas unfolded again, and collecting herself as well as she could, sheagain began the mortifying perusal of all that related to Wickham, andcommanded herself so far as to examine the meaning of every sentence.The account of his connection with the Pemberley family was exactly whathe had related himself; and the kindness of the late Mr. Darcy, thoughshe had not before known its extent, agreed equally well with his ownwords. So far each recital confirmed the other; but when she came to thewill, the difference was great. What Wickham had said of the livingwas fresh in her memory, and as she recalled his very words, it wasimpossible not to feel that there was gross duplicity on one side or theother; and, for a few moments, she flattered herself that her wishes didnot err. But when she read and re-read with the closest attention, theparticulars immediately following of Wickham’s resigning all pretensionsto the living, of his receiving in lieu so considerable a sum as threethousand pounds, again was she forced to hesitate. She put downthe letter, weighed every circumstance with what she meant to beimpartiality--deliberated on the probability of each statement--but withlittle success. On both sides it was only assertion. Again she readon; but every line proved more clearly that the affair, which she hadbelieved it impossible that any contrivance could so represent as torender Mr. Darcy’s conduct in it less than infamous, was capable of aturn which must make him entirely blameless throughout the whole.The extravagance and general profligacy which he scrupled not to lay atMr. Wickham’s charge, exceedingly shocked her; the more so, as she couldbring no proof of its injustice. She had never heard of him before hisentrance into the ----shire Militia, in which he had engaged at thepersuasion of the young man who, on meeting him accidentally in town,had there renewed a slight acquaintance. Of his former way of lifenothing had been known in Hertfordshire but what he told himself. Asto his real character, had information been in her power, she hadnever felt a wish of inquiring. His countenance, voice, and manner hadestablished him at once in the possession of every virtue. She triedto recollect some instance of goodness, some distinguished trait ofintegrity or benevolence, that might rescue him from the attacks ofMr. Darcy; or at least, by the predominance of virtue, atone for thosecasual errors under which she would endeavour to class what Mr. Darcyhad described as the idleness and vice of many years’ continuance. Butno such recollection befriended her. She could see him instantly beforeher, in every charm of air and address; but she could remember no moresubstantial good than the general approbation of the neighbourhood, andthe regard which his social powers had gained him in the mess. Afterpausing on this point a considerable while, she once more continued toread. But, alas! the story which followed, of his designs on MissDarcy, received some confirmation from what had passed between ColonelFitzwilliam and herself only the morning before; and at last she wasreferred for the truth of every particular to Colonel Fitzwilliamhimself--from whom she had previously received the information of hisnear concern in all his cousin’s affairs, and whose character she had noreason to question. At one time she had almost resolved on applying tohim, but the idea was checked by the awkwardness of the application, andat length wholly banished by the conviction that Mr. Darcy would neverhave hazarded such a proposal, if he had not been well assured of hiscousin’s corroboration.She perfectly remembered everything that had passed in conversationbetween Wickham and herself, in their first evening at Mr. Phillips’s.Many of his expressions were still fresh in her memory. She was _now_struck with the impropriety of such communications to a stranger, andwondered it had escaped her before. She saw the indelicacy of puttinghimself forward as he had done, and the inconsistency of his professionswith his conduct. She remembered that he had boasted of having no fearof seeing Mr. Darcy--that Mr. Darcy might leave the country, but that_he_ should stand his ground; yet he had avoided the Netherfield ballthe very next week. She remembered also that, till the Netherfieldfamily had quitted the country, he had told his story to no one butherself; but that after their removal it had been everywhere discussed;that he had then no reserves, no scruples in sinking Mr. Darcy’scharacter, though he had assured her that respect for the father wouldalways prevent his exposing the son.How differently did everything now appear in which he was concerned!His attentions to Miss King were now the consequence of views solely andhatefully mercenary; and the mediocrity of her fortune proved no longerthe moderation of his wishes, but his eagerness to grasp at anything.His behaviour to herself could now have had no tolerable motive; he hadeither been deceived with regard to her fortune, or had been gratifyinghis vanity by encouraging the preference which she believed she had mostincautiously shown. Every lingering struggle in his favour grew fainterand fainter; and in farther justification of Mr. Darcy, she could notbut allow that Mr. Bingley, when questioned by Jane, had long agoasserted his blamelessness in the affair; that proud and repulsive aswere his manners, she had never, in the whole course of theiracquaintance--an acquaintance which had latterly brought them muchtogether, and given her a sort of intimacy with his ways--seen anythingthat betrayed him to be unprincipled or unjust--anything that spoke himof irreligious or immoral habits; that among his own connections he wasesteemed and valued--that even Wickham had allowed him merit as abrother, and that she had often heard him speak so affectionately of hissister as to prove him capable of _some_ amiable feeling; that had hisactions been what Mr. Wickham represented them, so gross a violation ofeverything right could hardly have been concealed from the world; andthat friendship between a person capable of it, and such an amiable manas Mr. Bingley, was incomprehensible.She grew absolutely ashamed of herself. Of neither Darcy nor Wickhamcould she think without feeling she had been blind, partial, prejudiced,absurd.“How despicably I have acted!” she cried; “I, who have prided myselfon my discernment! I, who have valued myself on my abilities! who haveoften disdained the generous candour of my sister, and gratifiedmy vanity in useless or blameable mistrust! How humiliating is thisdiscovery! Yet, how just a humiliation! Had I been in love, I couldnot have been more wretchedly blind! But vanity, not love, has been myfolly. Pleased with the preference of one, and offended by the neglectof the other, on the very beginning of our acquaintance, I have courtedprepossession and ignorance, and driven reason away, where either wereconcerned. Till this moment I never knew myself.”From herself to Jane--from Jane to Bingley, her thoughts were in a linewhich soon brought to her recollection that Mr. Darcy’s explanation_there_ had appeared very insufficient, and she read it again. Widelydifferent was the effect of a second perusal. How could she deny thatcredit to his assertions in one instance, which she had been obliged togive in the other? He declared himself to be totally unsuspicious of hersister’s attachment; and she could not help remembering what Charlotte’sopinion had always been. Neither could she deny the justice of hisdescription of Jane. She felt that Jane’s feelings, though fervent, werelittle displayed, and that there was a constant complacency in her airand manner not often united with great sensibility.When she came to that part of the letter in which her family werementioned in terms of such mortifying, yet merited reproach, her senseof shame was severe. The justice of the charge struck her too forciblyfor denial, and the circumstances to which he particularly alluded ashaving passed at the Netherfield ball, and as confirming all his firstdisapprobation, could not have made a stronger impression on his mindthan on hers.The compliment to herself and her sister was not unfelt. It soothed,but it could not console her for the contempt which had thus beenself-attracted by the rest of her family; and as she consideredthat Jane’s disappointment had in fact been the work of her nearestrelations, and reflected how materially the credit of both must be hurtby such impropriety of conduct, she felt depressed beyond anything shehad ever known before.After wandering along the lane for two hours, giving way to everyvariety of thought--re-considering events, determining probabilities,and reconciling herself, as well as she could, to a change so sudden andso important, fatigue, and a recollection of her long absence, madeher at length return home; and she entered the house with the wishof appearing cheerful as usual, and the resolution of repressing suchreflections as must make her unfit for conversation.She was immediately told that the two gentlemen from Rosings had eachcalled during her absence; Mr. Darcy, only for a few minutes, to takeleave--but that Colonel Fitzwilliam had been sitting with them at leastan hour, hoping for her return, and almost resolving to walk after hertill she could be found. Elizabeth could but just _affect_ concernin missing him; she really rejoiced at it. Colonel Fitzwilliam was nolonger an object; she could think only of her letter.Chapter 37The two gentlemen left Rosings the next morning, and Mr. Collins havingbeen in waiting near the lodges, to make them his parting obeisance, wasable to bring home the pleasing intelligence, of their appearing in verygood health, and in as tolerable spirits as could be expected, after themelancholy scene so lately gone through at Rosings. To Rosings he thenhastened, to console Lady Catherine and her daughter; and on his returnbrought back, with great satisfaction, a message from her ladyship,importing that she felt herself so dull as to make her very desirous ofhaving them all to dine with her.Elizabeth could not see Lady Catherine without recollecting that, hadshe chosen it, she might by this time have been presented to her asher future niece; nor could she think, without a smile, of what herladyship’s indignation would have been. “What would she have said? howwould she have behaved?” were questions with which she amused herself.Their first subject was the diminution of the Rosings party. “I assureyou, I feel it exceedingly,” said Lady Catherine; “I believe no onefeels the loss of friends so much as I do. But I am particularlyattached to these young men, and know them to be so much attached tome! They were excessively sorry to go! But so they always are. Thedear Colonel rallied his spirits tolerably till just at last; but Darcyseemed to feel it most acutely, more, I think, than last year. Hisattachment to Rosings certainly increases.”Mr. Collins had a compliment, and an allusion to throw in here, whichwere kindly smiled on by the mother and daughter.Lady Catherine observed, after dinner, that Miss Bennet seemed out ofspirits, and immediately accounting for it by herself, by supposing thatshe did not like to go home again so soon, she added:“But if that is the case, you must write to your mother and beg thatyou may stay a little longer. Mrs. Collins will be very glad of yourcompany, I am sure.”“I am much obliged to your ladyship for your kind invitation,” repliedElizabeth, “but it is not in my power to accept it. I must be in townnext Saturday.”“Why, at that rate, you will have been here only six weeks. I expectedyou to stay two months. I told Mrs. Collins so before you came. Therecan be no occasion for your going so soon. Mrs. Bennet could certainlyspare you for another fortnight.”“But my father cannot. He wrote last week to hurry my return.”“Oh! your father of course may spare you, if your mother can. Daughtersare never of so much consequence to a father. And if you will stayanother _month_ complete, it will be in my power to take one of you asfar as London, for I am going there early in June, for a week; and asDawson does not object to the barouche-box, there will be very good roomfor one of you--and indeed, if the weather should happen to be cool, Ishould not object to taking you both, as you are neither of you large.”“You are all kindness, madam; but I believe we must abide by ouroriginal plan.”Lady Catherine seemed resigned. “Mrs. Collins, you must send a servantwith them. You know I always speak my mind, and I cannot bear the ideaof two young women travelling post by themselves. It is highly improper.You must contrive to send somebody. I have the greatest dislike inthe world to that sort of thing. Young women should always be properlyguarded and attended, according to their situation in life. When myniece Georgiana went to Ramsgate last summer, I made a point of herhaving two men-servants go with her. Miss Darcy, the daughter ofMr. Darcy, of Pemberley, and Lady Anne, could not have appeared withpropriety in a different manner. I am excessively attentive to all thosethings. You must send John with the young ladies, Mrs. Collins. Iam glad it occurred to me to mention it; for it would really bediscreditable to _you_ to let them go alone.”“My uncle is to send a servant for us.”“Oh! Your uncle! He keeps a man-servant, does he? I am very glad youhave somebody who thinks of these things. Where shall you change horses?Oh! Bromley, of course. If you mention my name at the Bell, you will beattended to.”Lady Catherine had many other questions to ask respecting their journey,and as she did not answer them all herself, attention was necessary,which Elizabeth believed to be lucky for her; or, with a mind sooccupied, she might have forgotten where she was. Reflection must bereserved for solitary hours; whenever she was alone, she gave way to itas the greatest relief; and not a day went by without a solitarywalk, in which she might indulge in all the delight of unpleasantrecollections.Mr. Darcy’s letter she was in a fair way of soon knowing by heart. Shestudied every sentence; and her feelings towards its writer were attimes widely different. When she remembered the style of his address,she was still full of indignation; but when she considered how unjustlyshe had condemned and upbraided him, her anger was turned againstherself; and his disappointed feelings became the object of compassion.His attachment excited gratitude, his general character respect; but shecould not approve him; nor could she for a moment repent her refusal,or feel the slightest inclination ever to see him again. In her own pastbehaviour, there was a constant source of vexation and regret; and inthe unhappy defects of her family, a subject of yet heavier chagrin.They were hopeless of remedy. Her father, contented with laughing atthem, would never exert himself to restrain the wild giddiness of hisyoungest daughters; and her mother, with manners so far from rightherself, was entirely insensible of the evil. Elizabeth had frequentlyunited with Jane in an endeavour to check the imprudence of Catherineand Lydia; but while they were supported by their mother’s indulgence,what chance could there be of improvement? Catherine, weak-spirited,irritable, and completely under Lydia’s guidance, had been alwaysaffronted by their advice; and Lydia, self-willed and careless, wouldscarcely give them a hearing. They were ignorant, idle, and vain. Whilethere was an officer in Meryton, they would flirt with him; and whileMeryton was within a walk of Longbourn, they would be going thereforever.Anxiety on Jane’s behalf was another prevailing concern; and Mr. Darcy’sexplanation, by restoring Bingley to all her former good opinion,heightened the sense of what Jane had lost. His affection was provedto have been sincere, and his conduct cleared of all blame, unless anycould attach to the implicitness of his confidence in his friend. Howgrievous then was the thought that, of a situation so desirable in everyrespect, so replete with advantage, so promising for happiness, Jane hadbeen deprived, by the folly and indecorum of her own family!When to these recollections was added the development of Wickham’scharacter, it may be easily believed that the happy spirits which hadseldom been depressed before, were now so much affected as to make italmost impossible for her to appear tolerably cheerful.Their engagements at Rosings were as frequent during the last week ofher stay as they had been at first. The very last evening was spentthere; and her ladyship again inquired minutely into the particulars oftheir journey, gave them directions as to the best method of packing,and was so urgent on the necessity of placing gowns in the only rightway, that Maria thought herself obliged, on her return, to undo all thework of the morning, and pack her trunk afresh.When they parted, Lady Catherine, with great condescension, wished thema good journey, and invited them to come to Hunsford again next year;and Miss de Bourgh exerted herself so far as to curtsey and hold out herhand to both.Chapter 38On Saturday morning Elizabeth and Mr. Collins met for breakfast a fewminutes before the others appeared; and he took the opportunity ofpaying the parting civilities which he deemed indispensably necessary.“I know not, Miss Elizabeth,” said he, “whether Mrs. Collins has yetexpressed her sense of your kindness in coming to us; but I am verycertain you will not leave the house without receiving her thanks forit. The favour of your company has been much felt, I assure you. Weknow how little there is to tempt anyone to our humble abode. Our plainmanner of living, our small rooms and few domestics, and the little wesee of the world, must make Hunsford extremely dull to a young lady likeyourself; but I hope you will believe us grateful for the condescension,and that we have done everything in our power to prevent your spendingyour time unpleasantly.”Elizabeth was eager with her thanks and assurances of happiness. Shehad spent six weeks with great enjoyment; and the pleasure of being withCharlotte, and the kind attentions she had received, must make _her_feel the obliged. Mr. Collins was gratified, and with a more smilingsolemnity replied:“It gives me great pleasure to hear that you have passed your time notdisagreeably. We have certainly done our best; and most fortunatelyhaving it in our power to introduce you to very superior society, and,from our connection with Rosings, the frequent means of varying thehumble home scene, I think we may flatter ourselves that your Hunsfordvisit cannot have been entirely irksome. Our situation with regard toLady Catherine’s family is indeed the sort of extraordinary advantageand blessing which few can boast. You see on what a footing we are. Yousee how continually we are engaged there. In truth I must acknowledgethat, with all the disadvantages of this humble parsonage, I shouldnot think anyone abiding in it an object of compassion, while they aresharers of our intimacy at Rosings.”Words were insufficient for the elevation of his feelings; and he wasobliged to walk about the room, while Elizabeth tried to unite civilityand truth in a few short sentences.“You may, in fact, carry a very favourable report of us intoHertfordshire, my dear cousin. I flatter myself at least that you willbe able to do so. Lady Catherine’s great attentions to Mrs. Collins youhave been a daily witness of; and altogether I trust it does not appearthat your friend has drawn an unfortunate--but on this point it will beas well to be silent. Only let me assure you, my dear Miss Elizabeth,that I can from my heart most cordially wish you equal felicity inmarriage. My dear Charlotte and I have but one mind and one way ofthinking. There is in everything a most remarkable resemblance ofcharacter and ideas between us. We seem to have been designed for eachother.”Elizabeth could safely say that it was a great happiness where that wasthe case, and with equal sincerity could add, that she firmly believedand rejoiced in his domestic comforts. She was not sorry, however, tohave the recital of them interrupted by the lady from whom they sprang.Poor Charlotte! it was melancholy to leave her to such society! But shehad chosen it with her eyes open; and though evidently regretting thather visitors were to go, she did not seem to ask for compassion. Herhome and her housekeeping, her parish and her poultry, and all theirdependent concerns, had not yet lost their charms.At length the chaise arrived, the trunks were fastened on, the parcelsplaced within, and it was pronounced to be ready. After an affectionateparting between the friends, Elizabeth was attended to the carriage byMr. Collins, and as they walked down the garden he was commissioning herwith his best respects to all her family, not forgetting his thanksfor the kindness he had received at Longbourn in the winter, and hiscompliments to Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner, though unknown. He then handed herin, Maria followed, and the door was on the point of being closed,when he suddenly reminded them, with some consternation, that they hadhitherto forgotten to leave any message for the ladies at Rosings.“But,” he added, “you will of course wish to have your humble respectsdelivered to them, with your grateful thanks for their kindness to youwhile you have been here.”Elizabeth made no objection; the door was then allowed to be shut, andthe carriage drove off.“Good gracious!” cried Maria, after a few minutes’ silence, “it seemsbut a day or two since we first came! and yet how many things havehappened!”“A great many indeed,” said her companion with a sigh.“We have dined nine times at Rosings, besides drinking tea there twice!How much I shall have to tell!”Elizabeth added privately, “And how much I shall have to conceal!”Their journey was performed without much conversation, or any alarm; andwithin four hours of their leaving Hunsford they reached Mr. Gardiner’shouse, where they were to remain a few days.Jane looked well, and Elizabeth had little opportunity of studying herspirits, amidst the various engagements which the kindness of heraunt had reserved for them. But Jane was to go home with her, and atLongbourn there would be leisure enough for observation.It was not without an effort, meanwhile, that she could wait even forLongbourn, before she told her sister of Mr. Darcy’s proposals. To knowthat she had the power of revealing what would so exceedingly astonishJane, and must, at the same time, so highly gratify whatever of her ownvanity she had not yet been able to reason away, was such a temptationto openness as nothing could have conquered but the state of indecisionin which she remained as to the extent of what she should communicate;and her fear, if she once entered on the subject, of being hurriedinto repeating something of Bingley which might only grieve her sisterfurther.Chapter 39It was the second week in May, in which the three young ladies set outtogether from Gracechurch Street for the town of ----, in Hertfordshire;and, as they drew near the appointed inn where Mr. Bennet’s carriagewas to meet them, they quickly perceived, in token of the coachman’spunctuality, both Kitty and Lydia looking out of a dining-room up stairs.These two girls had been above an hour in the place, happily employedin visiting an opposite milliner, watching the sentinel on guard, anddressing a salad and cucumber.After welcoming their sisters, they triumphantly displayed a table setout with such cold meat as an inn larder usually affords, exclaiming,“Is not this nice? Is not this an agreeable surprise?”“And we mean to treat you all,” added Lydia, “but you must lend us themoney, for we have just spent ours at the shop out there.” Then, showingher purchases--“Look here, I have bought this bonnet. I do not thinkit is very pretty; but I thought I might as well buy it as not. I shallpull it to pieces as soon as I get home, and see if I can make it up anybetter.”And when her sisters abused it as ugly, she added, with perfectunconcern, “Oh! but there were two or three much uglier in the shop; andwhen I have bought some prettier-coloured satin to trim it with fresh, Ithink it will be very tolerable. Besides, it will not much signify whatone wears this summer, after the ----shire have left Meryton, and theyare going in a fortnight.”“Are they indeed!” cried Elizabeth, with the greatest satisfaction.“They are going to be encamped near Brighton; and I do so want papa totake us all there for the summer! It would be such a delicious scheme;and I dare say would hardly cost anything at all. Mamma would like togo too of all things! Only think what a miserable summer else we shallhave!”“Yes,” thought Elizabeth, “_that_ would be a delightful scheme indeed,and completely do for us at once. Good Heaven! Brighton, and a wholecampful of soldiers, to us, who have been overset already by one poorregiment of militia, and the monthly balls of Meryton!”“Now I have got some news for you,” said Lydia, as they sat down attable. “What do you think? It is excellent news--capital news--and abouta certain person we all like!”Jane and Elizabeth looked at each other, and the waiter was told he neednot stay. Lydia laughed, and said:“Aye, that is just like your formality and discretion. You thought thewaiter must not hear, as if he cared! I dare say he often hears worsethings said than I am going to say. But he is an ugly fellow! I am gladhe is gone. I never saw such a long chin in my life. Well, but now formy news; it is about dear Wickham; too good for the waiter, is it not?There is no danger of Wickham’s marrying Mary King. There’s for you! Sheis gone down to her uncle at Liverpool: gone to stay. Wickham is safe.”“And Mary King is safe!” added Elizabeth; “safe from a connectionimprudent as to fortune.”“She is a great fool for going away, if she liked him.”“But I hope there is no strong attachment on either side,” said Jane.“I am sure there is not on _his_. I will answer for it, he never caredthree straws about her--who could about such a nasty little freckledthing?”Elizabeth was shocked to think that, however incapable of suchcoarseness of _expression_ herself, the coarseness of the _sentiment_was little other than her own breast had harboured and fancied liberal!As soon as all had ate, and the elder ones paid, the carriage wasordered; and after some contrivance, the whole party, with all theirboxes, work-bags, and parcels, and the unwelcome addition of Kitty’s andLydia’s purchases, were seated in it.“How nicely we are all crammed in,” cried Lydia. “I am glad I bought mybonnet, if it is only for the fun of having another bandbox! Well, nowlet us be quite comfortable and snug, and talk and laugh all the wayhome. And in the first place, let us hear what has happened to you allsince you went away. Have you seen any pleasant men? Have you had anyflirting? I was in great hopes that one of you would have got a husbandbefore you came back. Jane will be quite an old maid soon, I declare.She is almost three-and-twenty! Lord, how ashamed I should be of notbeing married before three-and-twenty! My aunt Phillips wants you so toget husbands, you can’t think. She says Lizzy had better have taken Mr.Collins; but _I_ do not think there would have been any fun in it. Lord!how I should like to be married before any of you; and then I wouldchaperon you about to all the balls. Dear me! we had such a good pieceof fun the other day at Colonel Forster’s. Kitty and me were to spendthe day there, and Mrs. Forster promised to have a little dance in theevening; (by the bye, Mrs. Forster and me are _such_ friends!) and soshe asked the two Harringtons to come, but Harriet was ill, and so Penwas forced to come by herself; and then, what do you think we did? Wedressed up Chamberlayne in woman’s clothes on purpose to pass for alady, only think what fun! Not a soul knew of it, but Colonel and Mrs.Forster, and Kitty and me, except my aunt, for we were forced to borrowone of her gowns; and you cannot imagine how well he looked! When Denny,and Wickham, and Pratt, and two or three more of the men came in, theydid not know him in the least. Lord! how I laughed! and so did Mrs.Forster. I thought I should have died. And _that_ made the men suspectsomething, and then they soon found out what was the matter.”With such kinds of histories of their parties and good jokes, didLydia, assisted by Kitty’s hints and additions, endeavour to amuse hercompanions all the way to Longbourn. Elizabeth listened as little as shecould, but there was no escaping the frequent mention of Wickham’s name.Their reception at home was most kind. Mrs. Bennet rejoiced to see Janein undiminished beauty; and more than once during dinner did Mr. Bennetsay voluntarily to Elizabeth:“I am glad you are come back, Lizzy.”Their party in the dining-room was large, for almost all the Lucasescame to meet Maria and hear the news; and various were the subjects thatoccupied them: Lady Lucas was inquiring of Maria, after the welfare andpoultry of her eldest daughter; Mrs. Bennet was doubly engaged, on onehand collecting an account of the present fashions from Jane, who satsome way below her, and, on the other, retailing them all to the youngerLucases; and Lydia, in a voice rather louder than any other person’s,was enumerating the various pleasures of the morning to anybody whowould hear her.“Oh! Mary,” said she, “I wish you had gone with us, for we had such fun!As we went along, Kitty and I drew up the blinds, and pretended therewas nobody in the coach; and I should have gone so all the way, if Kittyhad not been sick; and when we got to the George, I do think we behavedvery handsomely, for we treated the other three with the nicest coldluncheon in the world, and if you would have gone, we would have treatedyou too. And then when we came away it was such fun! I thought we nevershould have got into the coach. I was ready to die of laughter. And thenwe were so merry all the way home! we talked and laughed so loud, thatanybody might have heard us ten miles off!”To this Mary very gravely replied, “Far be it from me, my dear sister,to depreciate such pleasures! They would doubtless be congenial with thegenerality of female minds. But I confess they would have no charms for_me_--I should infinitely prefer a book.”But of this answer Lydia heard not a word. She seldom listened toanybody for more than half a minute, and never attended to Mary at all.In the afternoon Lydia was urgent with the rest of the girls to walkto Meryton, and to see how everybody went on; but Elizabeth steadilyopposed the scheme. It should not be said that the Miss Bennets couldnot be at home half a day before they were in pursuit of the officers.There was another reason too for her opposition. She dreaded seeing Mr.Wickham again, and was resolved to avoid it as long as possible. Thecomfort to _her_ of the regiment’s approaching removal was indeed beyondexpression. In a fortnight they were to go--and once gone, she hopedthere could be nothing more to plague her on his account.She had not been many hours at home before she found that the Brightonscheme, of which Lydia had given them a hint at the inn, was underfrequent discussion between her parents. Elizabeth saw directly that herfather had not the smallest intention of yielding; but his answers wereat the same time so vague and equivocal, that her mother, though oftendisheartened, had never yet despaired of succeeding at last.Chapter 40Elizabeth’s impatience to acquaint Jane with what had happened couldno longer be overcome; and at length, resolving to suppress everyparticular in which her sister was concerned, and preparing her to besurprised, she related to her the next morning the chief of the scenebetween Mr. Darcy and herself.Miss Bennet’s astonishment was soon lessened by the strong sisterlypartiality which made any admiration of Elizabeth appear perfectlynatural; and all surprise was shortly lost in other feelings. She wassorry that Mr. Darcy should have delivered his sentiments in a manner solittle suited to recommend them; but still more was she grieved for theunhappiness which her sister’s refusal must have given him.“His being so sure of succeeding was wrong,” said she, “and certainlyought not to have appeared; but consider how much it must increase hisdisappointment!”“Indeed,” replied Elizabeth, “I am heartily sorry for him; but he hasother feelings, which will probably soon drive away his regard for me.You do not blame me, however, for refusing him?”“Blame you! Oh, no.”“But you blame me for having spoken so warmly of Wickham?”“No--I do not know that you were wrong in saying what you did.”“But you _will_ know it, when I tell you what happened the very nextday.”She then spoke of the letter, repeating the whole of its contents as faras they concerned George Wickham. What a stroke was this for poor Jane!who would willingly have gone through the world without believing thatso much wickedness existed in the whole race of mankind, as was herecollected in one individual. Nor was Darcy’s vindication, thoughgrateful to her feelings, capable of consoling her for such discovery.Most earnestly did she labour to prove the probability of error, andseek to clear the one without involving the other.“This will not do,” said Elizabeth; “you never will be able to make bothof them good for anything. Take your choice, but you must be satisfiedwith only one. There is but such a quantity of merit between them; justenough to make one good sort of man; and of late it has been shiftingabout pretty much. For my part, I am inclined to believe it all Darcy’s;but you shall do as you choose.”It was some time, however, before a smile could be extorted from Jane.“I do not know when I have been more shocked,” said she. “Wickham sovery bad! It is almost past belief. And poor Mr. Darcy! Dear Lizzy, onlyconsider what he must have suffered. Such a disappointment! and with theknowledge of your ill opinion, too! and having to relate such a thingof his sister! It is really too distressing. I am sure you must feel itso.”“Oh! no, my regret and compassion are all done away by seeing you sofull of both. I know you will do him such ample justice, that I amgrowing every moment more unconcerned and indifferent. Your profusionmakes me saving; and if you lament over him much longer, my heart willbe as light as a feather.”“Poor Wickham! there is such an expression of goodness in hiscountenance! such an openness and gentleness in his manner!”“There certainly was some great mismanagement in the education of thosetwo young men. One has got all the goodness, and the other all theappearance of it.”“I never thought Mr. Darcy so deficient in the _appearance_ of it as youused to do.”“And yet I meant to be uncommonly clever in taking so decided a disliketo him, without any reason. It is such a spur to one’s genius, such anopening for wit, to have a dislike of that kind. One may be continuallyabusive without saying anything just; but one cannot always be laughingat a man without now and then stumbling on something witty.”“Lizzy, when you first read that letter, I am sure you could not treatthe matter as you do now.”“Indeed, I could not. I was uncomfortable enough, I may say unhappy. Andwith no one to speak to about what I felt, no Jane to comfort me and saythat I had not been so very weak and vain and nonsensical as I knew Ihad! Oh! how I wanted you!”“How unfortunate that you should have used such very strong expressionsin speaking of Wickham to Mr. Darcy, for now they _do_ appear whollyundeserved.”“Certainly. But the misfortune of speaking with bitterness is a mostnatural consequence of the prejudices I had been encouraging. Thereis one point on which I want your advice. I want to be told whether Iought, or ought not, to make our acquaintances in general understandWickham’s character.”Miss Bennet paused a little, and then replied, “Surely there can be nooccasion for exposing him so dreadfully. What is your opinion?”“That it ought not to be attempted. Mr. Darcy has not authorised meto make his communication public. On the contrary, every particularrelative to his sister was meant to be kept as much as possible tomyself; and if I endeavour to undeceive people as to the rest of hisconduct, who will believe me? The general prejudice against Mr. Darcyis so violent, that it would be the death of half the good people inMeryton to attempt to place him in an amiable light. I am not equalto it. Wickham will soon be gone; and therefore it will not signify toanyone here what he really is. Some time hence it will be all found out,and then we may laugh at their stupidity in not knowing it before. Atpresent I will say nothing about it.”“You are quite right. To have his errors made public might ruin him forever. He is now, perhaps, sorry for what he has done, and anxious tore-establish a character. We must not make him desperate.”The tumult of Elizabeth’s mind was allayed by this conversation. She hadgot rid of two of the secrets which had weighed on her for a fortnight,and was certain of a willing listener in Jane, whenever she might wishto talk again of either. But there was still something lurking behind,of which prudence forbade the disclosure. She dared not relate the otherhalf of Mr. Darcy’s letter, nor explain to her sister how sincerely shehad been valued by her friend. Here was knowledge in which no onecould partake; and she was sensible that nothing less than a perfectunderstanding between the parties could justify her in throwing offthis last encumbrance of mystery. “And then,” said she, “if that veryimprobable event should ever take place, I shall merely be able totell what Bingley may tell in a much more agreeable manner himself. Theliberty of communication cannot be mine till it has lost all its value!”She was now, on being settled at home, at leisure to observe the realstate of her sister’s spirits. Jane was not happy. She still cherished avery tender affection for Bingley. Having never even fancied herselfin love before, her regard had all the warmth of first attachment,and, from her age and disposition, greater steadiness than most firstattachments often boast; and so fervently did she value his remembrance,and prefer him to every other man, that all her good sense, and all herattention to the feelings of her friends, were requisite to check theindulgence of those regrets which must have been injurious to her ownhealth and their tranquillity.“Well, Lizzy,” said Mrs. Bennet one day, “what is your opinion _now_ ofthis sad business of Jane’s? For my part, I am determined never to speakof it again to anybody. I told my sister Phillips so the other day. ButI cannot find out that Jane saw anything of him in London. Well, he isa very undeserving young man--and I do not suppose there’s the leastchance in the world of her ever getting him now. There is no talk ofhis coming to Netherfield again in the summer; and I have inquired ofeverybody, too, who is likely to know.”“I do not believe he will ever live at Netherfield any more.”“Oh well! it is just as he chooses. Nobody wants him to come. Though Ishall always say he used my daughter extremely ill; and if I was her, Iwould not have put up with it. Well, my comfort is, I am sure Jane willdie of a broken heart; and then he will be sorry for what he has done.”But as Elizabeth could not receive comfort from any such expectation,she made no answer.“Well, Lizzy,” continued her mother, soon afterwards, “and so theCollinses live very comfortable, do they? Well, well, I only hopeit will last. And what sort of table do they keep? Charlotte is anexcellent manager, I dare say. If she is half as sharp as hermother, she is saving enough. There is nothing extravagant in _their_housekeeping, I dare say.”“No, nothing at all.”“A great deal of good management, depend upon it. Yes, yes, _they_ willtake care not to outrun their income. _They_ will never be distressedfor money. Well, much good may it do them! And so, I suppose, they oftentalk of having Longbourn when your father is dead. They look upon it asquite their own, I dare say, whenever that happens.”“It was a subject which they could not mention before me.”“No; it would have been strange if they had; but I make no doubt theyoften talk of it between themselves. Well, if they can be easy with anestate that is not lawfully their own, so much the better. I should beashamed of having one that was only entailed on me.”Chapter 41The first week of their return was soon gone. The second began. It wasthe last of the regiment’s stay in Meryton, and all the young ladiesin the neighbourhood were drooping apace. The dejection was almostuniversal. The elder Miss Bennets alone were still able to eat, drink,and sleep, and pursue the usual course of their employments. Veryfrequently were they reproached for this insensibility by Kitty andLydia, whose own misery was extreme, and who could not comprehend suchhard-heartedness in any of the family.“Good Heaven! what is to become of us? What are we to do?” would theyoften exclaim in the bitterness of woe. “How can you be smiling so,Lizzy?”Their affectionate mother shared all their grief; she remembered whatshe had herself endured on a similar occasion, five-and-twenty yearsago.“I am sure,” said she, “I cried for two days together when ColonelMiller’s regiment went away. I thought I should have broken my heart.”“I am sure I shall break _mine_,” said Lydia.“If one could but go to Brighton!” observed Mrs. Bennet.“Oh, yes!--if one could but go to Brighton! But papa is sodisagreeable.”“A little sea-bathing would set me up forever.”“And my aunt Phillips is sure it would do _me_ a great deal of good,” added Kitty.Such were the kind of lamentations resounding perpetually throughLongbourn House. Elizabeth tried to be diverted by them; but all senseof pleasure was lost in shame. She felt anew the justice of Mr. Darcy’sobjections; and never had she been so much disposed to pardon hisinterference in the views of his friend.But the gloom of Lydia’s prospect was shortly cleared away; for shereceived an invitation from Mrs. Forster, the wife of the colonel ofthe regiment, to accompany her to Brighton. This invaluable friend was avery young woman, and very lately married. A resemblance in good humourand good spirits had recommended her and Lydia to each other, and out oftheir _three_ months’ acquaintance they had been intimate _two_.The rapture of Lydia on this occasion, her adoration of Mrs. Forster,the delight of Mrs. Bennet, and the mortification of Kitty, are scarcelyto be described. Wholly inattentive to her sister’s feelings, Lydiaflew about the house in restless ecstasy, calling for everyone’scongratulations, and laughing and talking with more violence than ever;whilst the luckless Kitty continued in the parlour repined at her fatein terms as unreasonable as her accent was peevish.“I cannot see why Mrs. Forster should not ask _me_ as well as Lydia,” said she, “Though I am _not_ her particular friend. I have just as muchright to be asked as she has, and more too, for I am two years older.”In vain did Elizabeth attempt to make her reasonable, and Jane to makeher resigned. As for Elizabeth herself, this invitation was so far fromexciting in her the same feelings as in her mother and Lydia, that sheconsidered it as the death warrant of all possibility of common sensefor the latter; and detestable as such a step must make her were itknown, she could not help secretly advising her father not to let hergo. She represented to him all the improprieties of Lydia’s generalbehaviour, the little advantage she could derive from the friendship ofsuch a woman as Mrs. Forster, and the probability of her being yet moreimprudent with such a companion at Brighton, where the temptations mustbe greater than at home. He heard her attentively, and then said:“Lydia will never be easy until she has exposed herself in some publicplace or other, and we can never expect her to do it with solittle expense or inconvenience to her family as under the presentcircumstances.”“If you were aware,” said Elizabeth, “of the very great disadvantage tous all which must arise from the public notice of Lydia’s unguarded andimprudent manner--nay, which has already arisen from it, I am sure youwould judge differently in the affair.”“Already arisen?” repeated Mr. Bennet. “What, has she frightened awaysome of your lovers? Poor little Lizzy! But do not be cast down. Suchsqueamish youths as cannot bear to be connected with a little absurdityare not worth a regret. Come, let me see the list of pitiful fellows whohave been kept aloof by Lydia’s folly.”“Indeed you are mistaken. I have no such injuries to resent. It is notof particular, but of general evils, which I am now complaining. Ourimportance, our respectability in the world must be affected by thewild volatility, the assurance and disdain of all restraint which markLydia’s character. Excuse me, for I must speak plainly. If you, my dearfather, will not take the trouble of checking her exuberant spirits, andof teaching her that her present pursuits are not to be the business ofher life, she will soon be beyond the reach of amendment. Her characterwill be fixed, and she will, at sixteen, be the most determined flirtthat ever made herself or her family ridiculous; a flirt, too, in theworst and meanest degree of flirtation; without any attraction beyondyouth and a tolerable person; and, from the ignorance and emptinessof her mind, wholly unable to ward off any portion of that universalcontempt which her rage for admiration will excite. In this dangerKitty also is comprehended. She will follow wherever Lydia leads. Vain,ignorant, idle, and absolutely uncontrolled! Oh! my dear father, can yousuppose it possible that they will not be censured and despised whereverthey are known, and that their sisters will not be often involved in thedisgrace?”Mr. Bennet saw that her whole heart was in the subject, andaffectionately taking her hand said in reply:“Do not make yourself uneasy, my love. Wherever you and Jane are knownyou must be respected and valued; and you will not appear to lessadvantage for having a couple of--or I may say, three--very sillysisters. We shall have no peace at Longbourn if Lydia does not go toBrighton. Let her go, then. Colonel Forster is a sensible man, and willkeep her out of any real mischief; and she is luckily too poor to be anobject of prey to anybody. At Brighton she will be of less importanceeven as a common flirt than she has been here. The officers will findwomen better worth their notice. Let us hope, therefore, that her beingthere may teach her her own insignificance. At any rate, she cannot growmany degrees worse, without authorising us to lock her up for the restof her life.”With this answer Elizabeth was forced to be content; but her own opinioncontinued the same, and she left him disappointed and sorry. It was notin her nature, however, to increase her vexations by dwelling onthem. She was confident of having performed her duty, and to fretover unavoidable evils, or augment them by anxiety, was no part of herdisposition.Had Lydia and her mother known the substance of her conference with herfather, their indignation would hardly have found expression in theirunited volubility. In Lydia’s imagination, a visit to Brighton comprisedevery possibility of earthly happiness. She saw, with the creative eyeof fancy, the streets of that gay bathing-place covered with officers.She saw herself the object of attention, to tens and to scores of themat present unknown. She saw all the glories of the camp--its tentsstretched forth in beauteous uniformity of lines, crowded with the youngand the gay, and dazzling with scarlet; and, to complete the view, shesaw herself seated beneath a tent, tenderly flirting with at least sixofficers at once.Had she known her sister sought to tear her from such prospects and suchrealities as these, what would have been her sensations? They could havebeen understood only by her mother, who might have felt nearly the same.Lydia’s going to Brighton was all that consoled her for her melancholyconviction of her husband’s never intending to go there himself.But they were entirely ignorant of what had passed; and their rapturescontinued, with little intermission, to the very day of Lydia’s leavinghome.Elizabeth was now to see Mr. Wickham for the last time. Having beenfrequently in company with him since her return, agitation was prettywell over; the agitations of former partiality entirely so. She had evenlearnt to detect, in the very gentleness which had first delightedher, an affectation and a sameness to disgust and weary. In his presentbehaviour to herself, moreover, she had a fresh source of displeasure,for the inclination he soon testified of renewing those intentions whichhad marked the early part of their acquaintance could only serve, afterwhat had since passed, to provoke her. She lost all concern for him infinding herself thus selected as the object of such idle and frivolousgallantry; and while she steadily repressed it, could not but feel thereproof contained in his believing, that however long, and for whatevercause, his attentions had been withdrawn, her vanity would be gratified,and her preference secured at any time by their renewal.On the very last day of the regiment’s remaining at Meryton, he dined,with other of the officers, at Longbourn; and so little was Elizabethdisposed to part from him in good humour, that on his making someinquiry as to the manner in which her time had passed at Hunsford, shementioned Colonel Fitzwilliam’s and Mr. Darcy’s having both spent threeweeks at Rosings, and asked him, if he was acquainted with the former.He looked surprised, displeased, alarmed; but with a moment’srecollection and a returning smile, replied, that he had formerly seenhim often; and, after observing that he was a very gentlemanlike man,asked her how she had liked him. Her answer was warmly in his favour.With an air of indifference he soon afterwards added:“How long did you say he was at Rosings?”“Nearly three weeks.”“And you saw him frequently?”“Yes, almost every day.”“His manners are very different from his cousin’s.”“Yes, very different. But I think Mr. Darcy improves upon acquaintance.”“Indeed!” cried Mr. Wickham with a look which did not escape her. “Andpray, may I ask?--” But checking himself, he added, in a gayer tone, “Isit in address that he improves? Has he deigned to add aught of civilityto his ordinary style?--for I dare not hope,” he continued in a lowerand more serious tone, “that he is improved in essentials.”“Oh, no!” said Elizabeth. “In essentials, I believe, he is very muchwhat he ever was.”While she spoke, Wickham looked as if scarcely knowing whether torejoice over her words, or to distrust their meaning. There was asomething in her countenance which made him listen with an apprehensiveand anxious attention, while she added:“When I said that he improved on acquaintance, I did not mean thathis mind or his manners were in a state of improvement, but that, fromknowing him better, his disposition was better understood.”Wickham’s alarm now appeared in a heightened complexion and agitatedlook; for a few minutes he was silent, till, shaking off hisembarrassment, he turned to her again, and said in the gentlest ofaccents:“You, who so well know my feeling towards Mr. Darcy, will readilycomprehend how sincerely I must rejoice that he is wise enough to assumeeven the _appearance_ of what is right. His pride, in that direction,may be of service, if not to himself, to many others, for it must onlydeter him from such foul misconduct as I have suffered by. I onlyfear that the sort of cautiousness to which you, I imagine, have beenalluding, is merely adopted on his visits to his aunt, of whose goodopinion and judgement he stands much in awe. His fear of her has alwaysoperated, I know, when they were together; and a good deal is to beimputed to his wish of forwarding the match with Miss de Bourgh, which Iam certain he has very much at heart.”Elizabeth could not repress a smile at this, but she answered only by aslight inclination of the head. She saw that he wanted to engage her onthe old subject of his grievances, and she was in no humour to indulgehim. The rest of the evening passed with the _appearance_, on hisside, of usual cheerfulness, but with no further attempt to distinguishElizabeth; and they parted at last with mutual civility, and possibly amutual desire of never meeting again.When the party broke up, Lydia returned with Mrs. Forster to Meryton,from whence they were to set out early the next morning. The separationbetween her and her family was rather noisy than pathetic. Kitty was theonly one who shed tears; but she did weep from vexation and envy. Mrs.Bennet was diffuse in her good wishes for the felicity of her daughter,and impressive in her injunctions that she should not miss theopportunity of enjoying herself as much as possible--advice whichthere was every reason to believe would be well attended to; and inthe clamorous happiness of Lydia herself in bidding farewell, the moregentle adieus of her sisters were uttered without being heard.Chapter 42Had Elizabeth’s opinion been all drawn from her own family, she couldnot have formed a very pleasing opinion of conjugal felicity or domesticcomfort. Her father, captivated by youth and beauty, and that appearanceof good humour which youth and beauty generally give, had married awoman whose weak understanding and illiberal mind had very early intheir marriage put an end to all real affection for her. Respect,esteem, and confidence had vanished for ever; and all his viewsof domestic happiness were overthrown. But Mr. Bennet was not ofa disposition to seek comfort for the disappointment which his ownimprudence had brought on, in any of those pleasures which too oftenconsole the unfortunate for their folly or their vice. He was fond ofthe country and of books; and from these tastes had arisen his principalenjoyments. To his wife he was very little otherwise indebted, than asher ignorance and folly had contributed to his amusement. This is notthe sort of happiness which a man would in general wish to owe to hiswife; but where other powers of entertainment are wanting, the truephilosopher will derive benefit from such as are given.Elizabeth, however, had never been blind to the impropriety of herfather’s behaviour as a husband. She had always seen it with pain; butrespecting his abilities, and grateful for his affectionate treatment ofherself, she endeavoured to forget what she could not overlook, and tobanish from her thoughts that continual breach of conjugal obligationand decorum which, in exposing his wife to the contempt of her ownchildren, was so highly reprehensible. But she had never felt sostrongly as now the disadvantages which must attend the children of sounsuitable a marriage, nor ever been so fully aware of the evils arisingfrom so ill-judged a direction of talents; talents, which, rightly used,might at least have preserved the respectability of his daughters, evenif incapable of enlarging the mind of his wife.When Elizabeth had rejoiced over Wickham’s departure she found littleother cause for satisfaction in the loss of the regiment. Their partiesabroad were less varied than before, and at home she had a mother andsister whose constant repinings at the dullness of everything aroundthem threw a real gloom over their domestic circle; and, though Kittymight in time regain her natural degree of sense, since the disturbersof her brain were removed, her other sister, from whose dispositiongreater evil might be apprehended, was likely to be hardened in allher folly and assurance by a situation of such double danger as awatering-place and a camp. Upon the whole, therefore, she found, whathas been sometimes found before, that an event to which she had beenlooking with impatient desire did not, in taking place, bring all thesatisfaction she had promised herself. It was consequently necessary toname some other period for the commencement of actual felicity--to havesome other point on which her wishes and hopes might be fixed, and byagain enjoying the pleasure of anticipation, console herself for thepresent, and prepare for another disappointment. Her tour to the Lakeswas now the object of her happiest thoughts; it was her best consolationfor all the uncomfortable hours which the discontentedness of her motherand Kitty made inevitable; and could she have included Jane in thescheme, every part of it would have been perfect.“But it is fortunate,” thought she, “that I have something to wish for.Were the whole arrangement complete, my disappointment would be certain.But here, by carrying with me one ceaseless source of regret in mysister’s absence, I may reasonably hope to have all my expectations ofpleasure realised. A scheme of which every part promises delight cannever be successful; and general disappointment is only warded off bythe defence of some little peculiar vexation.”When Lydia went away she promised to write very often and very minutelyto her mother and Kitty; but her letters were always long expected, andalways very short. Those to her mother contained little else than thatthey were just returned from the library, where such and such officershad attended them, and where she had seen such beautiful ornaments asmade her quite wild; that she had a new gown, or a new parasol, whichshe would have described more fully, but was obliged to leave off in aviolent hurry, as Mrs. Forster called her, and they were going off tothe camp; and from her correspondence with her sister, there was stillless to be learnt--for her letters to Kitty, though rather longer, weremuch too full of lines under the words to be made public.After the first fortnight or three weeks of her absence, health, goodhumour, and cheerfulness began to reappear at Longbourn. Everything worea happier aspect. The families who had been in town for the winter cameback again, and summer finery and summer engagements arose. Mrs. Bennetwas restored to her usual querulous serenity; and, by the middle ofJune, Kitty was so much recovered as to be able to enter Meryton withouttears; an event of such happy promise as to make Elizabeth hope that bythe following Christmas she might be so tolerably reasonable as not tomention an officer above once a day, unless, by some cruel and maliciousarrangement at the War Office, another regiment should be quartered inMeryton.The time fixed for the beginning of their northern tour was now fastapproaching, and a fortnight only was wanting of it, when a letterarrived from Mrs. Gardiner, which at once delayed its commencement andcurtailed its extent. Mr. Gardiner would be prevented by business fromsetting out till a fortnight later in July, and must be in London againwithin a month, and as that left too short a period for them to go sofar, and see so much as they had proposed, or at least to see it withthe leisure and comfort they had built on, they were obliged to give upthe Lakes, and substitute a more contracted tour, and, according to thepresent plan, were to go no farther northwards than Derbyshire. In thatcounty there was enough to be seen to occupy the chief of their threeweeks; and to Mrs. Gardiner it had a peculiarly strong attraction. Thetown where she had formerly passed some years of her life, and wherethey were now to spend a few days, was probably as great an object ofher curiosity as all the celebrated beauties of Matlock, Chatsworth,Dovedale, or the Peak.Elizabeth was excessively disappointed; she had set her heart on seeingthe Lakes, and still thought there might have been time enough. But itwas her business to be satisfied--and certainly her temper to be happy;and all was soon right again.With the mention of Derbyshire there were many ideas connected. It wasimpossible for her to see the word without thinking of Pemberley and itsowner. “But surely,” said she, “I may enter his county with impunity,and rob it of a few petrified spars without his perceiving me.”The period of expectation was now doubled. Four weeks were to pass awaybefore her uncle and aunt’s arrival. But they did pass away, and Mr.and Mrs. Gardiner, with their four children, did at length appear atLongbourn. The children, two girls of six and eight years old, and twoyounger boys, were to be left under the particular care of theircousin Jane, who was the general favourite, and whose steady sense andsweetness of temper exactly adapted her for attending to them in everyway--teaching them, playing with them, and loving them.The Gardiners stayed only one night at Longbourn, and set off thenext morning with Elizabeth in pursuit of novelty and amusement.One enjoyment was certain--that of suitableness of companions;a suitableness which comprehended health and temper to bearinconveniences--cheerfulness to enhance every pleasure--and affectionand intelligence, which might supply it among themselves if there weredisappointments abroad.It is not the object of this work to give a description of Derbyshire,nor of any of the remarkable places through which their route thitherlay; Oxford, Blenheim, Warwick, Kenilworth, Birmingham, etc. aresufficiently known. A small part of Derbyshire is all the presentconcern. To the little town of Lambton, the scene of Mrs. Gardiner’sformer residence, and where she had lately learned some acquaintancestill remained, they bent their steps, after having seen all theprincipal wonders of the country; and within five miles of Lambton,Elizabeth found from her aunt that Pemberley was situated. It was notin their direct road, nor more than a mile or two out of it. Intalking over their route the evening before, Mrs. Gardiner expressedan inclination to see the place again. Mr. Gardiner declared hiswillingness, and Elizabeth was applied to for her approbation.“My love, should not you like to see a place of which you have heardso much?” said her aunt; “a place, too, with which so many of youracquaintances are connected. Wickham passed all his youth there, youknow.”Elizabeth was distressed. She felt that she had no business atPemberley, and was obliged to assume a disinclination for seeing it. Shemust own that she was tired of seeing great houses; after going over somany, she really had no pleasure in fine carpets or satin curtains.Mrs. Gardiner abused her stupidity. “If it were merely a fine houserichly furnished,” said she, “I should not care about it myself; butthe grounds are delightful. They have some of the finest woods in thecountry.”Elizabeth said no more--but her mind could not acquiesce. Thepossibility of meeting Mr. Darcy, while viewing the place, instantlyoccurred. It would be dreadful! She blushed at the very idea, andthought it would be better to speak openly to her aunt than to run sucha risk. But against this there were objections; and she finally resolvedthat it could be the last resource, if her private inquiries to theabsence of the family were unfavourably answered.Accordingly, when she retired at night, she asked the chambermaidwhether Pemberley were not a very fine place? what was the name of itsproprietor? and, with no little alarm, whether the family were down forthe summer? A most welcome negative followed the last question--and heralarms now being removed, she was at leisure to feel a great deal ofcuriosity to see the house herself; and when the subject was revived thenext morning, and she was again applied to, could readily answer, andwith a proper air of indifference, that she had not really any disliketo the scheme. To Pemberley, therefore, they were to go.Chapter 43Elizabeth, as they drove along, watched for the first appearance ofPemberley Woods with some perturbation; and when at length they turnedin at the lodge, her spirits were in a high flutter.The park was very large, and contained great variety of ground. Theyentered it in one of its lowest points, and drove for some time througha beautiful wood stretching over a wide extent.Elizabeth’s mind was too full for conversation, but she saw and admiredevery remarkable spot and point of view. They gradually ascended forhalf-a-mile, and then found themselves at the top of a considerableeminence, where the wood ceased, and the eye was instantly caught byPemberley House, situated on the opposite side of a valley, into whichthe road with some abruptness wound. It was a large, handsome stonebuilding, standing well on rising ground, and backed by a ridge ofhigh woody hills; and in front, a stream of some natural importance wasswelled into greater, but without any artificial appearance. Its bankswere neither formal nor falsely adorned. Elizabeth was delighted. Shehad never seen a place for which nature had done more, or where naturalbeauty had been so little counteracted by an awkward taste. They wereall of them warm in their admiration; and at that moment she felt thatto be mistress of Pemberley might be something!They descended the hill, crossed the bridge, and drove to the door; and,while examining the nearer aspect of the house, all her apprehension ofmeeting its owner returned. She dreaded lest the chambermaid had beenmistaken. On applying to see the place, they were admitted into thehall; and Elizabeth, as they waited for the housekeeper, had leisure towonder at her being where she was.The housekeeper came; a respectable-looking elderly woman, much lessfine, and more civil, than she had any notion of finding her. Theyfollowed her into the dining-parlour. It was a large, well proportionedroom, handsomely fitted up. Elizabeth, after slightly surveying it, wentto a window to enjoy its prospect. The hill, crowned with wood, whichthey had descended, receiving increased abruptness from the distance,was a beautiful object. Every disposition of the ground was good; andshe looked on the whole scene, the river, the trees scattered on itsbanks and the winding of the valley, as far as she could trace it,with delight. As they passed into other rooms these objects were takingdifferent positions; but from every window there were beauties to beseen. The rooms were lofty and handsome, and their furniture suitable tothe fortune of its proprietor; but Elizabeth saw, with admiration ofhis taste, that it was neither gaudy nor uselessly fine; with less ofsplendour, and more real elegance, than the furniture of Rosings.“And of this place,” thought she, “I might have been mistress! Withthese rooms I might now have been familiarly acquainted! Instead ofviewing them as a stranger, I might have rejoiced in them as my own, andwelcomed to them as visitors my uncle and aunt. But no,”--recollectingherself--“that could never be; my uncle and aunt would have been lost tome; I should not have been allowed to invite them.”This was a lucky recollection--it saved her from something very likeregret.She longed to inquire of the housekeeper whether her master was reallyabsent, but had not the courage for it. At length however, the questionwas asked by her uncle; and she turned away with alarm, while Mrs.Reynolds replied that he was, adding, “But we expect him to-morrow, witha large party of friends.” How rejoiced was Elizabeth that their ownjourney had not by any circumstance been delayed a day!Her aunt now called her to look at a picture. She approached and saw thelikeness of Mr. Wickham, suspended, amongst several other miniatures,over the mantelpiece. Her aunt asked her, smilingly, how she liked it.The housekeeper came forward, and told them it was a picture of a younggentleman, the son of her late master’s steward, who had been broughtup by him at his own expense. “He is now gone into the army,” she added;“but I am afraid he has turned out very wild.”Mrs. Gardiner looked at her niece with a smile, but Elizabeth could notreturn it.“And that,” said Mrs. Reynolds, pointing to another of the miniatures,“is my master--and very like him. It was drawn at the same time as theother--about eight years ago.”“I have heard much of your master’s fine person,” said Mrs. Gardiner,looking at the picture; “it is a handsome face. But, Lizzy, you can tellus whether it is like or not.”Mrs. Reynolds respect for Elizabeth seemed to increase on thisintimation of her knowing her master.“Does that young lady know Mr. Darcy?”Elizabeth coloured, and said: “A little.”“And do not you think him a very handsome gentleman, ma’am?”“Yes, very handsome.”“I am sure I know none so handsome; but in the gallery up stairs youwill see a finer, larger picture of him than this. This room was my latemaster’s favourite room, and these miniatures are just as they used tobe then. He was very fond of them.”This accounted to Elizabeth for Mr. Wickham’s being among them.Mrs. Reynolds then directed their attention to one of Miss Darcy, drawnwhen she was only eight years old.“And is Miss Darcy as handsome as her brother?” said Mrs. Gardiner.“Oh! yes--the handsomest young lady that ever was seen; and soaccomplished!--She plays and sings all day long. In the next room isa new instrument just come down for her--a present from my master; shecomes here to-morrow with him.”Mr. Gardiner, whose manners were very easy and pleasant, encouraged hercommunicativeness by his questions and remarks; Mrs. Reynolds, eitherby pride or attachment, had evidently great pleasure in talking of hermaster and his sister.“Is your master much at Pemberley in the course of the year?”“Not so much as I could wish, sir; but I dare say he may spend half histime here; and Miss Darcy is always down for the summer months.”“Except,” thought Elizabeth, “when she goes to Ramsgate.”“If your master would marry, you might see more of him.”“Yes, sir; but I do not know when _that_ will be. I do not know who isgood enough for him.”Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner smiled. Elizabeth could not help saying, “It isvery much to his credit, I am sure, that you should think so.”“I say no more than the truth, and everybody will say that knows him,” replied the other. Elizabeth thought this was going pretty far; and shelistened with increasing astonishment as the housekeeper added, “I havenever known a cross word from him in my life, and I have known him eversince he was four years old.”This was praise, of all others most extraordinary, most opposite to herideas. That he was not a good-tempered man had been her firmest opinion.Her keenest attention was awakened; she longed to hear more, and wasgrateful to her uncle for saying:“There are very few people of whom so much can be said. You are lucky inhaving such a master.”“Yes, sir, I know I am. If I were to go through the world, I couldnot meet with a better. But I have always observed, that they who aregood-natured when children, are good-natured when they grow up; andhe was always the sweetest-tempered, most generous-hearted boy in theworld.”Elizabeth almost stared at her. “Can this be Mr. Darcy?” thought she.“His father was an excellent man,” said Mrs. Gardiner.“Yes, ma’am, that he was indeed; and his son will be just like him--justas affable to the poor.”Elizabeth listened, wondered, doubted, and was impatient for more. Mrs.Reynolds could interest her on no other point. She related the subjectsof the pictures, the dimensions of the rooms, and the price of thefurniture, in vain. Mr. Gardiner, highly amused by the kind of familyprejudice to which he attributed her excessive commendation of hermaster, soon led again to the subject; and she dwelt with energy on hismany merits as they proceeded together up the great staircase.“He is the best landlord, and the best master,” said she, “that everlived; not like the wild young men nowadays, who think of nothing butthemselves. There is not one of his tenants or servants but will givehim a good name. Some people call him proud; but I am sure I never sawanything of it. To my fancy, it is only because he does not rattle awaylike other young men.”“In what an amiable light does this place him!” thought Elizabeth.“This fine account of him,” whispered her aunt as they walked, “is notquite consistent with his behaviour to our poor friend.”“Perhaps we might be deceived.”“That is not very likely; our authority was too good.”On reaching the spacious lobby above they were shown into a very prettysitting-room, lately fitted up with greater elegance and lightness thanthe apartments below; and were informed that it was but just done togive pleasure to Miss Darcy, who had taken a liking to the room whenlast at Pemberley.“He is certainly a good brother,” said Elizabeth, as she walked towardsone of the windows.Mrs. Reynolds anticipated Miss Darcy’s delight, when she should enterthe room. “And this is always the way with him,” she added. “Whatevercan give his sister any pleasure is sure to be done in a moment. Thereis nothing he would not do for her.”The picture-gallery, and two or three of the principal bedrooms, wereall that remained to be shown. In the former were many good paintings;but Elizabeth knew nothing of the art; and from such as had been alreadyvisible below, she had willingly turned to look at some drawings of MissDarcy’s, in crayons, whose subjects were usually more interesting, andalso more intelligible.In the gallery there were many family portraits, but they could havelittle to fix the attention of a stranger. Elizabeth walked in quest ofthe only face whose features would be known to her. At last it arrestedher--and she beheld a striking resemblance to Mr. Darcy, with such asmile over the face as she remembered to have sometimes seen when helooked at her. She stood several minutes before the picture, in earnestcontemplation, and returned to it again before they quitted the gallery.Mrs. Reynolds informed them that it had been taken in his father’slifetime.There was certainly at this moment, in Elizabeth’s mind, a more gentlesensation towards the original than she had ever felt at the height oftheir acquaintance. The commendation bestowed on him by Mrs. Reynoldswas of no trifling nature. What praise is more valuable than the praiseof an intelligent servant? As a brother, a landlord, a master, sheconsidered how many people’s happiness were in his guardianship!--howmuch of pleasure or pain was it in his power to bestow!--how much ofgood or evil must be done by him! Every idea that had been broughtforward by the housekeeper was favourable to his character, and as shestood before the canvas on which he was represented, and fixed hiseyes upon herself, she thought of his regard with a deeper sentiment ofgratitude than it had ever raised before; she remembered its warmth, andsoftened its impropriety of expression.When all of the house that was open to general inspection had been seen,they returned downstairs, and, taking leave of the housekeeper, wereconsigned over to the gardener, who met them at the hall-door.As they walked across the hall towards the river, Elizabeth turned backto look again; her uncle and aunt stopped also, and while the formerwas conjecturing as to the date of the building, the owner of it himselfsuddenly came forward from the road, which led behind it to the stables.They were within twenty yards of each other, and so abrupt was hisappearance, that it was impossible to avoid his sight. Their eyesinstantly met, and the cheeks of both were overspread with the deepestblush. He absolutely started, and for a moment seemed immovable fromsurprise; but shortly recovering himself, advanced towards the party,and spoke to Elizabeth, if not in terms of perfect composure, at leastof perfect civility.She had instinctively turned away; but stopping on his approach,received his compliments with an embarrassment impossible to beovercome. Had his first appearance, or his resemblance to the picturethey had just been examining, been insufficient to assure the other twothat they now saw Mr. Darcy, the gardener’s expression of surprise, onbeholding his master, must immediately have told it. They stood a littlealoof while he was talking to their niece, who, astonished and confused,scarcely dared lift her eyes to his face, and knew not what answershe returned to his civil inquiries after her family. Amazed at thealteration of his manner since they last parted, every sentence thathe uttered was increasing her embarrassment; and every idea of theimpropriety of her being found there recurring to her mind, the fewminutes in which they continued were some of the most uncomfortable inher life. Nor did he seem much more at ease; when he spoke, his accenthad none of its usual sedateness; and he repeated his inquiries asto the time of her having left Longbourn, and of her having stayed inDerbyshire, so often, and in so hurried a way, as plainly spoke thedistraction of his thoughts.At length every idea seemed to fail him; and, after standing a fewmoments without saying a word, he suddenly recollected himself, and tookleave.The others then joined her, and expressed admiration of his figure; butElizabeth heard not a word, and wholly engrossed by her own feelings,followed them in silence. She was overpowered by shame and vexation. Hercoming there was the most unfortunate, the most ill-judged thing in theworld! How strange it must appear to him! In what a disgraceful lightmight it not strike so vain a man! It might seem as if she had purposelythrown herself in his way again! Oh! why did she come? Or, why did hethus come a day before he was expected? Had they been only ten minutessooner, they should have been beyond the reach of his discrimination;for it was plain that he was that moment arrived--that moment alightedfrom his horse or his carriage. She blushed again and again overthe perverseness of the meeting. And his behaviour, so strikinglyaltered--what could it mean? That he should even speak to her wasamazing!--but to speak with such civility, to inquire after her family!Never in her life had she seen his manners so little dignified, neverhad he spoken with such gentleness as on this unexpected meeting. Whata contrast did it offer to his last address in Rosings Park, when he puthis letter into her hand! She knew not what to think, or how to accountfor it.They had now entered a beautiful walk by the side of the water, andevery step was bringing forward a nobler fall of ground, or a finerreach of the woods to which they were approaching; but it was some timebefore Elizabeth was sensible of any of it; and, though she answeredmechanically to the repeated appeals of her uncle and aunt, andseemed to direct her eyes to such objects as they pointed out, shedistinguished no part of the scene. Her thoughts were all fixed on thatone spot of Pemberley House, whichever it might be, where Mr. Darcy thenwas. She longed to know what at the moment was passing in his mind--inwhat manner he thought of her, and whether, in defiance of everything,she was still dear to him. Perhaps he had been civil only because hefelt himself at ease; yet there had been _that_ in his voice which wasnot like ease. Whether he had felt more of pain or of pleasure inseeing her she could not tell, but he certainly had not seen her withcomposure.At length, however, the remarks of her companions on her absence of mindaroused her, and she felt the necessity of appearing more like herself.They entered the woods, and bidding adieu to the river for a while,ascended some of the higher grounds; when, in spots where the opening ofthe trees gave the eye power to wander, were many charming views of thevalley, the opposite hills, with the long range of woods overspreadingmany, and occasionally part of the stream. Mr. Gardiner expressed a wishof going round the whole park, but feared it might be beyond a walk.With a triumphant smile they were told that it was ten miles round.It settled the matter; and they pursued the accustomed circuit; whichbrought them again, after some time, in a descent among hanging woods,to the edge of the water, and one of its narrowest parts. They crossedit by a simple bridge, in character with the general air of the scene;it was a spot less adorned than any they had yet visited; and thevalley, here contracted into a glen, allowed room only for the stream,and a narrow walk amidst the rough coppice-wood which bordered it.Elizabeth longed to explore its windings; but when they had crossed thebridge, and perceived their distance from the house, Mrs. Gardiner,who was not a great walker, could go no farther, and thought onlyof returning to the carriage as quickly as possible. Her niece was,therefore, obliged to submit, and they took their way towards the houseon the opposite side of the river, in the nearest direction; but theirprogress was slow, for Mr. Gardiner, though seldom able to indulge thetaste, was very fond of fishing, and was so much engaged in watching theoccasional appearance of some trout in the water, and talking to theman about them, that he advanced but little. Whilst wandering on in thisslow manner, they were again surprised, and Elizabeth’s astonishmentwas quite equal to what it had been at first, by the sight of Mr. Darcyapproaching them, and at no great distance. The walk being hereless sheltered than on the other side, allowed them to see him beforethey met. Elizabeth, however astonished, was at least more preparedfor an interview than before, and resolved to appear and to speak withcalmness, if he really intended to meet them. For a few moments, indeed,she felt that he would probably strike into some other path. The idealasted while a turning in the walk concealed him from their view; theturning past, he was immediately before them. With a glance, she sawthat he had lost none of his recent civility; and, to imitate hispoliteness, she began, as they met, to admire the beauty of the place;but she had not got beyond the words “delightful,” and “charming,” whensome unlucky recollections obtruded, and she fancied that praise ofPemberley from her might be mischievously construed. Her colour changed,and she said no more.Mrs. Gardiner was standing a little behind; and on her pausing, he askedher if she would do him the honour of introducing him to her friends.This was a stroke of civility for which she was quite unprepared;and she could hardly suppress a smile at his being now seeking theacquaintance of some of those very people against whom his pride hadrevolted in his offer to herself. “What will be his surprise,” thoughtshe, “when he knows who they are? He takes them now for people offashion.”The introduction, however, was immediately made; and as she named theirrelationship to herself, she stole a sly look at him, to see how he boreit, and was not without the expectation of his decamping as fast as hecould from such disgraceful companions. That he was _surprised_ by theconnection was evident; he sustained it, however, with fortitude, andso far from going away, turned back with them, and entered intoconversation with Mr. Gardiner. Elizabeth could not but be pleased,could not but triumph. It was consoling that he should know she hadsome relations for whom there was no need to blush. She listened mostattentively to all that passed between them, and gloried in everyexpression, every sentence of her uncle, which marked his intelligence,his taste, or his good manners.The conversation soon turned upon fishing; and she heard Mr. Darcyinvite him, with the greatest civility, to fish there as often as hechose while he continued in the neighbourhood, offering at the same timeto supply him with fishing tackle, and pointing out those parts ofthe stream where there was usually most sport. Mrs. Gardiner, who waswalking arm-in-arm with Elizabeth, gave her a look expressive of wonder.Elizabeth said nothing, but it gratified her exceedingly; the complimentmust be all for herself. Her astonishment, however, was extreme, andcontinually was she repeating, “Why is he so altered? From what canit proceed? It cannot be for _me_--it cannot be for _my_ sake that hismanners are thus softened. My reproofs at Hunsford could not work such achange as this. It is impossible that he should still love me.”After walking some time in this way, the two ladies in front, the twogentlemen behind, on resuming their places, after descending tothe brink of the river for the better inspection of some curiouswater-plant, there chanced to be a little alteration. It originatedin Mrs. Gardiner, who, fatigued by the exercise of the morning, foundElizabeth’s arm inadequate to her support, and consequently preferredher husband’s. Mr. Darcy took her place by her niece, and they walked ontogether. After a short silence, the lady first spoke. She wished himto know that she had been assured of his absence before she came to theplace, and accordingly began by observing, that his arrival had beenvery unexpected--“for your housekeeper,” she added, “informed us thatyou would certainly not be here till to-morrow; and indeed, before weleft Bakewell, we understood that you were not immediately expectedin the country.” He acknowledged the truth of it all, and said thatbusiness with his steward had occasioned his coming forward a few hoursbefore the rest of the party with whom he had been travelling. “Theywill join me early to-morrow,” he continued, “and among them are somewho will claim an acquaintance with you--Mr. Bingley and his sisters.”Elizabeth answered only by a slight bow. Her thoughts were instantlydriven back to the time when Mr. Bingley’s name had been the lastmentioned between them; and, if she might judge by his complexion, _his_mind was not very differently engaged.“There is also one other person in the party,” he continued after apause, “who more particularly wishes to be known to you. Will you allowme, or do I ask too much, to introduce my sister to your acquaintanceduring your stay at Lambton?”The surprise of such an application was great indeed; it was too greatfor her to know in what manner she acceded to it. She immediately feltthat whatever desire Miss Darcy might have of being acquainted with hermust be the work of her brother, and, without looking farther, it wassatisfactory; it was gratifying to know that his resentment had not madehim think really ill of her.They now walked on in silence, each of them deep in thought. Elizabethwas not comfortable; that was impossible; but she was flattered andpleased. His wish of introducing his sister to her was a compliment ofthe highest kind. They soon outstripped the others, and when they hadreached the carriage, Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner were half a quarter of amile behind.He then asked her to walk into the house--but she declared herself nottired, and they stood together on the lawn. At such a time much mighthave been said, and silence was very awkward. She wanted to talk, butthere seemed to be an embargo on every subject. At last she recollectedthat she had been travelling, and they talked of Matlock and Dove Dalewith great perseverance. Yet time and her aunt moved slowly--and herpatience and her ideas were nearly worn out before the tete-a-tete wasover. On Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner’s coming up they were all pressed to gointo the house and take some refreshment; but this was declined, andthey parted on each side with utmost politeness. Mr. Darcy handed theladies into the carriage; and when it drove off, Elizabeth saw himwalking slowly towards the house.The observations of her uncle and aunt now began; and each of thempronounced him to be infinitely superior to anything they had expected.“He is perfectly well behaved, polite, and unassuming,” said her uncle.“There _is_ something a little stately in him, to be sure,” replied heraunt, “but it is confined to his air, and is not unbecoming. I can nowsay with the housekeeper, that though some people may call him proud, Ihave seen nothing of it.”“I was never more surprised than by his behaviour to us. It was morethan civil; it was really attentive; and there was no necessity for suchattention. His acquaintance with Elizabeth was very trifling.”“To be sure, Lizzy,” said her aunt, “he is not so handsome as Wickham;or, rather, he has not Wickham’s countenance, for his featuresare perfectly good. But how came you to tell me that he was sodisagreeable?”Elizabeth excused herself as well as she could; said that she had likedhim better when they had met in Kent than before, and that she had neverseen him so pleasant as this morning.“But perhaps he may be a little whimsical in his civilities,” repliedher uncle. “Your great men often are; and therefore I shall not take himat his word, as he might change his mind another day, and warn me offhis grounds.”Elizabeth felt that they had entirely misunderstood his character, butsaid nothing.“From what we have seen of him,” continued Mrs. Gardiner, “I reallyshould not have thought that he could have behaved in so cruel a way byanybody as he has done by poor Wickham. He has not an ill-natured look.On the contrary, there is something pleasing about his mouth when hespeaks. And there is something of dignity in his countenance that wouldnot give one an unfavourable idea of his heart. But, to be sure, thegood lady who showed us his house did give him a most flaming character!I could hardly help laughing aloud sometimes. But he is a liberalmaster, I suppose, and _that_ in the eye of a servant comprehends everyvirtue.”Elizabeth here felt herself called on to say something in vindication ofhis behaviour to Wickham; and therefore gave them to understand, inas guarded a manner as she could, that by what she had heard fromhis relations in Kent, his actions were capable of a very differentconstruction; and that his character was by no means so faulty, norWickham’s so amiable, as they had been considered in Hertfordshire. Inconfirmation of this, she related the particulars of all the pecuniarytransactions in which they had been connected, without actually namingher authority, but stating it to be such as might be relied on.Mrs. Gardiner was surprised and concerned; but as they were nowapproaching the scene of her former pleasures, every idea gave way tothe charm of recollection; and she was too much engaged in pointing outto her husband all the interesting spots in its environs to think ofanything else. Fatigued as she had been by the morning’s walk theyhad no sooner dined than she set off again in quest of her formeracquaintance, and the evening was spent in the satisfactions of aintercourse renewed after many years’ discontinuance.The occurrences of the day were too full of interest to leave Elizabethmuch attention for any of these new friends; and she could do nothingbut think, and think with wonder, of Mr. Darcy’s civility, and, aboveall, of his wishing her to be acquainted with his sister.Chapter 44Elizabeth had settled it that Mr. Darcy would bring his sister to visither the very day after her reaching Pemberley; and was consequentlyresolved not to be out of sight of the inn the whole of that morning.But her conclusion was false; for on the very morning after theirarrival at Lambton, these visitors came. They had been walking about theplace with some of their new friends, and were just returning to the innto dress themselves for dining with the same family, when the sound of acarriage drew them to a window, and they saw a gentleman and a lady ina curricle driving up the street. Elizabeth immediately recognizingthe livery, guessed what it meant, and imparted no small degree of hersurprise to her relations by acquainting them with the honour which sheexpected. Her uncle and aunt were all amazement; and the embarrassmentof her manner as she spoke, joined to the circumstance itself, and manyof the circumstances of the preceding day, opened to them a new idea onthe business. Nothing had ever suggested it before, but they felt thatthere was no other way of accounting for such attentions from such aquarter than by supposing a partiality for their niece. While thesenewly-born notions were passing in their heads, the perturbation ofElizabeth’s feelings was at every moment increasing. She was quiteamazed at her own discomposure; but amongst other causes of disquiet,she dreaded lest the partiality of the brother should have said too muchin her favour; and, more than commonly anxious to please, she naturallysuspected that every power of pleasing would fail her.She retreated from the window, fearful of being seen; and as she walkedup and down the room, endeavouring to compose herself, saw such looks ofinquiring surprise in her uncle and aunt as made everything worse.Miss Darcy and her brother appeared, and this formidable introductiontook place. With astonishment did Elizabeth see that her newacquaintance was at least as much embarrassed as herself. Since herbeing at Lambton, she had heard that Miss Darcy was exceedingly proud;but the observation of a very few minutes convinced her that she wasonly exceedingly shy. She found it difficult to obtain even a word fromher beyond a monosyllable.Miss Darcy was tall, and on a larger scale than Elizabeth; and, thoughlittle more than sixteen, her figure was formed, and her appearancewomanly and graceful. She was less handsome than her brother; but therewas sense and good humour in her face, and her manners were perfectlyunassuming and gentle. Elizabeth, who had expected to find in her asacute and unembarrassed an observer as ever Mr. Darcy had been, was muchrelieved by discerning such different feelings.They had not long been together before Mr. Darcy told her that Bingleywas also coming to wait on her; and she had barely time to express hersatisfaction, and prepare for such a visitor, when Bingley’s quickstep was heard on the stairs, and in a moment he entered the room. AllElizabeth’s anger against him had been long done away; but had she stillfelt any, it could hardly have stood its ground against the unaffectedcordiality with which he expressed himself on seeing her again. Heinquired in a friendly, though general way, after her family, and lookedand spoke with the same good-humoured ease that he had ever done.To Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner he was scarcely a less interesting personagethan to herself. They had long wished to see him. The whole party beforethem, indeed, excited a lively attention. The suspicions which had justarisen of Mr. Darcy and their niece directed their observation towardseach with an earnest though guarded inquiry; and they soon drew fromthose inquiries the full conviction that one of them at least knewwhat it was to love. Of the lady’s sensations they remained a littlein doubt; but that the gentleman was overflowing with admiration wasevident enough.Elizabeth, on her side, had much to do. She wanted to ascertain thefeelings of each of her visitors; she wanted to compose her own, andto make herself agreeable to all; and in the latter object, where shefeared most to fail, she was most sure of success, for those to whom sheendeavoured to give pleasure were prepossessed in her favour. Bingleywas ready, Georgiana was eager, and Darcy determined, to be pleased.In seeing Bingley, her thoughts naturally flew to her sister; and, oh!how ardently did she long to know whether any of his were directed ina like manner. Sometimes she could fancy that he talked less than onformer occasions, and once or twice pleased herself with the notionthat, as he looked at her, he was trying to trace a resemblance. But,though this might be imaginary, she could not be deceived as to hisbehaviour to Miss Darcy, who had been set up as a rival to Jane. No lookappeared on either side that spoke particular regard. Nothing occurredbetween them that could justify the hopes of his sister. On this pointshe was soon satisfied; and two or three little circumstances occurredere they parted, which, in her anxious interpretation, denoted arecollection of Jane not untinctured by tenderness, and a wish of sayingmore that might lead to the mention of her, had he dared. He observedto her, at a moment when the others were talking together, and in a tonewhich had something of real regret, that it “was a very long time sincehe had had the pleasure of seeing her;” and, before she could reply,he added, “It is above eight months. We have not met since the 26th ofNovember, when we were all dancing together at Netherfield.”Elizabeth was pleased to find his memory so exact; and he afterwardstook occasion to ask her, when unattended to by any of the rest, whether_all_ her sisters were at Longbourn. There was not much in the question,nor in the preceding remark; but there was a look and a manner whichgave them meaning.It was not often that she could turn her eyes on Mr. Darcy himself;but, whenever she did catch a glimpse, she saw an expression of generalcomplaisance, and in all that he said she heard an accent so removedfrom _hauteur_ or disdain of his companions, as convinced her thatthe improvement of manners which she had yesterday witnessed howevertemporary its existence might prove, had at least outlived one day. Whenshe saw him thus seeking the acquaintance and courting the good opinionof people with whom any intercourse a few months ago would have been adisgrace--when she saw him thus civil, not only to herself, but to thevery relations whom he had openly disdained, and recollected their lastlively scene in Hunsford Parsonage--the difference, the change wasso great, and struck so forcibly on her mind, that she could hardlyrestrain her astonishment from being visible. Never, even in the companyof his dear friends at Netherfield, or his dignified relationsat Rosings, had she seen him so desirous to please, so free fromself-consequence or unbending reserve, as now, when no importancecould result from the success of his endeavours, and when even theacquaintance of those to whom his attentions were addressed would drawdown the ridicule and censure of the ladies both of Netherfield andRosings.Their visitors stayed with them above half-an-hour; and when they aroseto depart, Mr. Darcy called on his sister to join him in expressingtheir wish of seeing Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner, and Miss Bennet, to dinnerat Pemberley, before they left the country. Miss Darcy, though with adiffidence which marked her little in the habit of giving invitations,readily obeyed. Mrs. Gardiner looked at her niece, desirous of knowinghow _she_, whom the invitation most concerned, felt disposed as to itsacceptance, but Elizabeth had turned away her head. Presuming however,that this studied avoidance spoke rather a momentary embarrassment thanany dislike of the proposal, and seeing in her husband, who was fond ofsociety, a perfect willingness to accept it, she ventured to engage forher attendance, and the day after the next was fixed on.Bingley expressed great pleasure in the certainty of seeing Elizabethagain, having still a great deal to say to her, and many inquiries tomake after all their Hertfordshire friends. Elizabeth, construing allthis into a wish of hearing her speak of her sister, was pleased, and onthis account, as well as some others, found herself, when theirvisitors left them, capable of considering the last half-hour with somesatisfaction, though while it was passing, the enjoyment of it had beenlittle. Eager to be alone, and fearful of inquiries or hints from heruncle and aunt, she stayed with them only long enough to hear theirfavourable opinion of Bingley, and then hurried away to dress.But she had no reason to fear Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner’s curiosity; it wasnot their wish to force her communication. It was evident that she wasmuch better acquainted with Mr. Darcy than they had before any idea of;it was evident that he was very much in love with her. They saw much tointerest, but nothing to justify inquiry.Of Mr. Darcy it was now a matter of anxiety to think well; and, as faras their acquaintance reached, there was no fault to find. They couldnot be untouched by his politeness; and had they drawn his characterfrom their own feelings and his servant’s report, without any referenceto any other account, the circle in Hertfordshire to which he was knownwould not have recognized it for Mr. Darcy. There was now an interest,however, in believing the housekeeper; and they soon became sensiblethat the authority of a servant who had known him since he was fouryears old, and whose own manners indicated respectability, was not to behastily rejected. Neither had anything occurred in the intelligence oftheir Lambton friends that could materially lessen its weight. They hadnothing to accuse him of but pride; pride he probably had, and if not,it would certainly be imputed by the inhabitants of a small market-townwhere the family did not visit. It was acknowledged, however, that hewas a liberal man, and did much good among the poor.With respect to Wickham, the travellers soon found that he was not heldthere in much estimation; for though the chief of his concerns with theson of his patron were imperfectly understood, it was yet a well-knownfact that, on his quitting Derbyshire, he had left many debts behindhim, which Mr. Darcy afterwards discharged.As for Elizabeth, her thoughts were at Pemberley this evening more thanthe last; and the evening, though as it passed it seemed long, was notlong enough to determine her feelings towards _one_ in that mansion;and she lay awake two whole hours endeavouring to make them out. Shecertainly did not hate him. No; hatred had vanished long ago, and shehad almost as long been ashamed of ever feeling a dislike against him,that could be so called. The respect created by the conviction of hisvaluable qualities, though at first unwillingly admitted, had for sometime ceased to be repugnant to her feeling; and it was now heightenedinto somewhat of a friendlier nature, by the testimony so highly inhis favour, and bringing forward his disposition in so amiable a light,which yesterday had produced. But above all, above respect and esteem,there was a motive within her of goodwill which could not be overlooked.It was gratitude; gratitude, not merely for having once loved her,but for loving her still well enough to forgive all the petulance andacrimony of her manner in rejecting him, and all the unjust accusationsaccompanying her rejection. He who, she had been persuaded, would avoidher as his greatest enemy, seemed, on this accidental meeting, mosteager to preserve the acquaintance, and without any indelicate displayof regard, or any peculiarity of manner, where their two selves onlywere concerned, was soliciting the good opinion of her friends, and benton making her known to his sister. Such a change in a man of so muchpride exciting not only astonishment but gratitude--for to love, ardentlove, it must be attributed; and as such its impression on her was of asort to be encouraged, as by no means unpleasing, though it could not beexactly defined. She respected, she esteemed, she was grateful to him,she felt a real interest in his welfare; and she only wanted to know howfar she wished that welfare to depend upon herself, and how far it wouldbe for the happiness of both that she should employ the power, which herfancy told her she still possessed, of bringing on her the renewal ofhis addresses.It had been settled in the evening between the aunt and the niece, thatsuch a striking civility as Miss Darcy’s in coming to see them on thevery day of her arrival at Pemberley, for she had reached it only to alate breakfast, ought to be imitated, though it could not be equalled,by some exertion of politeness on their side; and, consequently, thatit would be highly expedient to wait on her at Pemberley the followingmorning. They were, therefore, to go. Elizabeth was pleased; though whenshe asked herself the reason, she had very little to say in reply.Mr. Gardiner left them soon after breakfast. The fishing scheme had beenrenewed the day before, and a positive engagement made of his meetingsome of the gentlemen at Pemberley before noon.Convinced as Elizabeth now was that Miss Bingley’s dislike of her hadoriginated in jealousy, she could not help feeling how unwelcome herappearance at Pemberley must be to her, and was curious to know with howmuch civility on that lady’s side the acquaintance would now be renewed.On reaching the house, they were shown through the hall into the saloon,whose northern aspect rendered it delightful for summer. Its windowsopening to the ground, admitted a most refreshing view of the high woodyhills behind the house, and of the beautiful oaks and Spanish chestnutswhich were scattered over the intermediate lawn.In this house they were received by Miss Darcy, who was sitting therewith Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley, and the lady with whom she lived inLondon. Georgiana’s reception of them was very civil, but attended withall the embarrassment which, though proceeding from shyness and the fearof doing wrong, would easily give to those who felt themselves inferiorthe belief of her being proud and reserved. Mrs. Gardiner and her niece,however, did her justice, and pitied her.By Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley they were noticed only by a curtsey; and,on their being seated, a pause, awkward as such pauses must always be,succeeded for a few moments. It was first broken by Mrs. Annesley, agenteel, agreeable-looking woman, whose endeavour to introduce some kindof discourse proved her to be more truly well-bred than either of theothers; and between her and Mrs. Gardiner, with occasional help fromElizabeth, the conversation was carried on. Miss Darcy looked as if shewished for courage enough to join in it; and sometimes did venture ashort sentence when there was least danger of its being heard.Elizabeth soon saw that she was herself closely watched by Miss Bingley,and that she could not speak a word, especially to Miss Darcy, withoutcalling her attention. This observation would not have prevented herfrom trying to talk to the latter, had they not been seated at aninconvenient distance; but she was not sorry to be spared the necessityof saying much. Her own thoughts were employing her. She expected everymoment that some of the gentlemen would enter the room. She wished, shefeared that the master of the house might be amongst them; and whethershe wished or feared it most, she could scarcely determine. Aftersitting in this manner a quarter of an hour without hearing MissBingley’s voice, Elizabeth was roused by receiving from her a coldinquiry after the health of her family. She answered with equalindifference and brevity, and the other said no more.The next variation which their visit afforded was produced by theentrance of servants with cold meat, cake, and a variety of all thefinest fruits in season; but this did not take place till after manya significant look and smile from Mrs. Annesley to Miss Darcy had beengiven, to remind her of her post. There was now employment for the wholeparty--for though they could not all talk, they could all eat; and thebeautiful pyramids of grapes, nectarines, and peaches soon collectedthem round the table.While thus engaged, Elizabeth had a fair opportunity of deciding whethershe most feared or wished for the appearance of Mr. Darcy, by thefeelings which prevailed on his entering the room; and then, though buta moment before she had believed her wishes to predominate, she began toregret that he came.He had been some time with Mr. Gardiner, who, with two or three othergentlemen from the house, was engaged by the river, and had left himonly on learning that the ladies of the family intended a visit toGeorgiana that morning. No sooner did he appear than Elizabeth wiselyresolved to be perfectly easy and unembarrassed; a resolution the morenecessary to be made, but perhaps not the more easily kept, because shesaw that the suspicions of the whole party were awakened against them,and that there was scarcely an eye which did not watch his behaviourwhen he first came into the room. In no countenance was attentivecuriosity so strongly marked as in Miss Bingley’s, in spite of thesmiles which overspread her face whenever she spoke to one of itsobjects; for jealousy had not yet made her desperate, and her attentionsto Mr. Darcy were by no means over. Miss Darcy, on her brother’sentrance, exerted herself much more to talk, and Elizabeth saw that hewas anxious for his sister and herself to get acquainted, and forwardedas much as possible, every attempt at conversation on either side. MissBingley saw all this likewise; and, in the imprudence of anger, took thefirst opportunity of saying, with sneering civility:“Pray, Miss Eliza, are not the ----shire Militia removed from Meryton?They must be a great loss to _your_ family.”In Darcy’s presence she dared not mention Wickham’s name; but Elizabethinstantly comprehended that he was uppermost in her thoughts; and thevarious recollections connected with him gave her a moment’s distress;but exerting herself vigorously to repel the ill-natured attack, shepresently answered the question in a tolerably detached tone. Whileshe spoke, an involuntary glance showed her Darcy, with a heightenedcomplexion, earnestly looking at her, and his sister overcome withconfusion, and unable to lift up her eyes. Had Miss Bingley known whatpain she was then giving her beloved friend, she undoubtedly wouldhave refrained from the hint; but she had merely intended to discomposeElizabeth by bringing forward the idea of a man to whom she believedher partial, to make her betray a sensibility which might injure her inDarcy’s opinion, and, perhaps, to remind the latter of all the folliesand absurdities by which some part of her family were connectedwith that corps. Not a syllable had ever reached her of Miss Darcy’smeditated elopement. To no creature had it been revealed, where secrecywas possible, except to Elizabeth; and from all Bingley’s connectionsher brother was particularly anxious to conceal it, from the verywish which Elizabeth had long ago attributed to him, of their becominghereafter her own. He had certainly formed such a plan, and withoutmeaning that it should affect his endeavour to separate him from MissBennet, it is probable that it might add something to his lively concernfor the welfare of his friend.Elizabeth’s collected behaviour, however, soon quieted his emotion; andas Miss Bingley, vexed and disappointed, dared not approach nearer toWickham, Georgiana also recovered in time, though not enough to be ableto speak any more. Her brother, whose eye she feared to meet, scarcelyrecollected her interest in the affair, and the very circumstance whichhad been designed to turn his thoughts from Elizabeth seemed to havefixed them on her more and more cheerfully.Their visit did not continue long after the question and answer abovementioned; and while Mr. Darcy was attending them to their carriage MissBingley was venting her feelings in criticisms on Elizabeth’s person,behaviour, and dress. But Georgiana would not join her. Her brother’srecommendation was enough to ensure her favour; his judgement could noterr. And he had spoken in such terms of Elizabeth as to leave Georgianawithout the power of finding her otherwise than lovely and amiable. WhenDarcy returned to the saloon, Miss Bingley could not help repeating tohim some part of what she had been saying to his sister.“How very ill Miss Eliza Bennet looks this morning, Mr. Darcy,” shecried; “I never in my life saw anyone so much altered as she is sincethe winter. She is grown so brown and coarse! Louisa and I were agreeingthat we should not have known her again.”However little Mr. Darcy might have liked such an address, he contentedhimself with coolly replying that he perceived no other alteration thanher being rather tanned, no miraculous consequence of travelling in thesummer.“For my own part,” she rejoined, “I must confess that I never couldsee any beauty in her. Her face is too thin; her complexion has nobrilliancy; and her features are not at all handsome. Her nosewants character--there is nothing marked in its lines. Her teeth aretolerable, but not out of the common way; and as for her eyes,which have sometimes been called so fine, I could never see anythingextraordinary in them. They have a sharp, shrewish look, which I donot like at all; and in her air altogether there is a self-sufficiencywithout fashion, which is intolerable.”Persuaded as Miss Bingley was that Darcy admired Elizabeth, this was notthe best method of recommending herself; but angry people are not alwayswise; and in seeing him at last look somewhat nettled, she had all thesuccess she expected. He was resolutely silent, however, and, from adetermination of making him speak, she continued:“I remember, when we first knew her in Hertfordshire, how amazed we allwere to find that she was a reputed beauty; and I particularly recollectyour saying one night, after they had been dining at Netherfield, ‘_She_a beauty!--I should as soon call her mother a wit.’ But afterwards sheseemed to improve on you, and I believe you thought her rather pretty atone time.”“Yes,” replied Darcy, who could contain himself no longer, “but _that_was only when I first saw her, for it is many months since I haveconsidered her as one of the handsomest women of my acquaintance.”He then went away, and Miss Bingley was left to all the satisfaction ofhaving forced him to say what gave no one any pain but herself.Mrs. Gardiner and Elizabeth talked of all that had occurred during theirvisit, as they returned, except what had particularly interested themboth. The look and behaviour of everybody they had seen were discussed,except of the person who had mostly engaged their attention. They talkedof his sister, his friends, his house, his fruit--of everything buthimself; yet Elizabeth was longing to know what Mrs. Gardiner thought ofhim, and Mrs. Gardiner would have been highly gratified by her niece’sbeginning the subject.Chapter 46Elizabeth had been a good deal disappointed in not finding a letter fromJane on their first arrival at Lambton; and this disappointment had beenrenewed on each of the mornings that had now been spent there; buton the third her repining was over, and her sister justified, by thereceipt of two letters from her at once, on one of which was marked thatit had been missent elsewhere. Elizabeth was not surprised at it, asJane had written the direction remarkably ill.They had just been preparing to walk as the letters came in; andher uncle and aunt, leaving her to enjoy them in quiet, set off bythemselves. The one missent must first be attended to; it had beenwritten five days ago. The beginning contained an account of all theirlittle parties and engagements, with such news as the country afforded;but the latter half, which was dated a day later, and written in evidentagitation, gave more important intelligence. It was to this effect:“Since writing the above, dearest Lizzy, something has occurred of amost unexpected and serious nature; but I am afraid of alarming you--beassured that we are all well. What I have to say relates to poor Lydia.An express came at twelve last night, just as we were all gone to bed,from Colonel Forster, to inform us that she was gone off to Scotlandwith one of his officers; to own the truth, with Wickham! Imagine oursurprise. To Kitty, however, it does not seem so wholly unexpected. I amvery, very sorry. So imprudent a match on both sides! But I am willingto hope the best, and that his character has been misunderstood.Thoughtless and indiscreet I can easily believe him, but this step(and let us rejoice over it) marks nothing bad at heart. His choice isdisinterested at least, for he must know my father can give her nothing.Our poor mother is sadly grieved. My father bears it better. Howthankful am I that we never let them know what has been said againsthim; we must forget it ourselves. They were off Saturday night abouttwelve, as is conjectured, but were not missed till yesterday morning ateight. The express was sent off directly. My dear Lizzy, they must havepassed within ten miles of us. Colonel Forster gives us reason to expecthim here soon. Lydia left a few lines for his wife, informing her oftheir intention. I must conclude, for I cannot be long from my poormother. I am afraid you will not be able to make it out, but I hardlyknow what I have written.”Without allowing herself time for consideration, and scarcely knowingwhat she felt, Elizabeth on finishing this letter instantly seized theother, and opening it with the utmost impatience, read as follows: ithad been written a day later than the conclusion of the first.“By this time, my dearest sister, you have received my hurried letter; Iwish this may be more intelligible, but though not confined for time, myhead is so bewildered that I cannot answer for being coherent. DearestLizzy, I hardly know what I would write, but I have bad news for you,and it cannot be delayed. Imprudent as the marriage between Mr. Wickhamand our poor Lydia would be, we are now anxious to be assured it hastaken place, for there is but too much reason to fear they are not goneto Scotland. Colonel Forster came yesterday, having left Brighton theday before, not many hours after the express. Though Lydia’s shortletter to Mrs. F. gave them to understand that they were going to GretnaGreen, something was dropped by Denny expressing his belief that W.never intended to go there, or to marry Lydia at all, which wasrepeated to Colonel F., who, instantly taking the alarm, set off from B.intending to trace their route. He did trace them easily to Clapham,but no further; for on entering that place, they removed into a hackneycoach, and dismissed the chaise that brought them from Epsom. All thatis known after this is, that they were seen to continue the London road.I know not what to think. After making every possible inquiry on thatside London, Colonel F. came on into Hertfordshire, anxiously renewingthem at all the turnpikes, and at the inns in Barnet and Hatfield, butwithout any success--no such people had been seen to pass through. Withthe kindest concern he came on to Longbourn, and broke his apprehensionsto us in a manner most creditable to his heart. I am sincerely grievedfor him and Mrs. F., but no one can throw any blame on them. Ourdistress, my dear Lizzy, is very great. My father and mother believe theworst, but I cannot think so ill of him. Many circumstances might makeit more eligible for them to be married privately in town than to pursuetheir first plan; and even if _he_ could form such a design against ayoung woman of Lydia’s connections, which is not likely, can I supposeher so lost to everything? Impossible! I grieve to find, however, thatColonel F. is not disposed to depend upon their marriage; he shook hishead when I expressed my hopes, and said he feared W. was not a man tobe trusted. My poor mother is really ill, and keeps her room. Could sheexert herself, it would be better; but this is not to be expected. Andas to my father, I never in my life saw him so affected. Poor Kitty hasanger for having concealed their attachment; but as it was a matter ofconfidence, one cannot wonder. I am truly glad, dearest Lizzy, that youhave been spared something of these distressing scenes; but now, as thefirst shock is over, shall I own that I long for your return? I am notso selfish, however, as to press for it, if inconvenient. Adieu! Itake up my pen again to do what I have just told you I would not; butcircumstances are such that I cannot help earnestly begging you all tocome here as soon as possible. I know my dear uncle and aunt so well,that I am not afraid of requesting it, though I have still somethingmore to ask of the former. My father is going to London with ColonelForster instantly, to try to discover her. What he means to do I am sureI know not; but his excessive distress will not allow him to pursue anymeasure in the best and safest way, and Colonel Forster is obliged tobe at Brighton again to-morrow evening. In such an exigence, myuncle’s advice and assistance would be everything in the world; he willimmediately comprehend what I must feel, and I rely upon his goodness.”“Oh! where, where is my uncle?” cried Elizabeth, darting from her seatas she finished the letter, in eagerness to follow him, without losinga moment of the time so precious; but as she reached the door it wasopened by a servant, and Mr. Darcy appeared. Her pale face and impetuousmanner made him start, and before he could recover himself to speak,she, in whose mind every idea was superseded by Lydia’s situation,hastily exclaimed, “I beg your pardon, but I must leave you. I must findMr. Gardiner this moment, on business that cannot be delayed; I have notan instant to lose.”“Good God! what is the matter?” cried he, with more feeling thanpoliteness; then recollecting himself, “I will not detain you a minute;but let me, or let the servant go after Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner. You arenot well enough; you cannot go yourself.”Elizabeth hesitated, but her knees trembled under her and she felt howlittle would be gained by her attempting to pursue them. Calling backthe servant, therefore, she commissioned him, though in so breathlessan accent as made her almost unintelligible, to fetch his master andmistress home instantly.On his quitting the room she sat down, unable to support herself, andlooking so miserably ill, that it was impossible for Darcy to leave her,or to refrain from saying, in a tone of gentleness and commiseration,“Let me call your maid. Is there nothing you could take to give youpresent relief? A glass of wine; shall I get you one? You are very ill.”“No, I thank you,” she replied, endeavouring to recover herself. “Thereis nothing the matter with me. I am quite well; I am only distressed bysome dreadful news which I have just received from Longbourn.”She burst into tears as she alluded to it, and for a few minutes couldnot speak another word. Darcy, in wretched suspense, could only saysomething indistinctly of his concern, and observe her in compassionatesilence. At length she spoke again. “I have just had a letter from Jane,with such dreadful news. It cannot be concealed from anyone. My youngersister has left all her friends--has eloped; has thrown herself intothe power of--of Mr. Wickham. They are gone off together from Brighton._You_ know him too well to doubt the rest. She has no money, noconnections, nothing that can tempt him to--she is lost for ever.”Darcy was fixed in astonishment. “When I consider,” she added in a yetmore agitated voice, “that I might have prevented it! I, who knew whathe was. Had I but explained some part of it only--some part of what Ilearnt, to my own family! Had his character been known, this could nothave happened. But it is all--all too late now.”“I am grieved indeed,” cried Darcy; “grieved--shocked. But is itcertain--absolutely certain?”“Oh, yes! They left Brighton together on Sunday night, and were tracedalmost to London, but not beyond; they are certainly not gone toScotland.”“And what has been done, what has been attempted, to recover her?”“My father is gone to London, and Jane has written to beg my uncle’simmediate assistance; and we shall be off, I hope, in half-an-hour. Butnothing can be done--I know very well that nothing can be done. How issuch a man to be worked on? How are they even to be discovered? I havenot the smallest hope. It is every way horrible!”Darcy shook his head in silent acquiescence.“When _my_ eyes were opened to his real character--Oh! had I known whatI ought, what I dared to do! But I knew not--I was afraid of doing toomuch. Wretched, wretched mistake!”Darcy made no answer. He seemed scarcely to hear her, and was walkingup and down the room in earnest meditation, his brow contracted, his airgloomy. Elizabeth soon observed, and instantly understood it. Herpower was sinking; everything _must_ sink under such a proof of familyweakness, such an assurance of the deepest disgrace. She could neitherwonder nor condemn, but the belief of his self-conquest brought nothingconsolatory to her bosom, afforded no palliation of her distress. Itwas, on the contrary, exactly calculated to make her understand her ownwishes; and never had she so honestly felt that she could have lovedhim, as now, when all love must be vain.But self, though it would intrude, could not engross her. Lydia--thehumiliation, the misery she was bringing on them all, soon swallowedup every private care; and covering her face with her handkerchief,Elizabeth was soon lost to everything else; and, after a pause ofseveral minutes, was only recalled to a sense of her situation bythe voice of her companion, who, in a manner which, though it spokecompassion, spoke likewise restraint, said, “I am afraid you have beenlong desiring my absence, nor have I anything to plead in excuse of mystay, but real, though unavailing concern. Would to Heaven that anythingcould be either said or done on my part that might offer consolation tosuch distress! But I will not torment you with vain wishes, which mayseem purposely to ask for your thanks. This unfortunate affair will, Ifear, prevent my sister’s having the pleasure of seeing you at Pemberleyto-day.”“Oh, yes. Be so kind as to apologise for us to Miss Darcy. Say thaturgent business calls us home immediately. Conceal the unhappy truth aslong as it is possible, I know it cannot be long.”He readily assured her of his secrecy; again expressed his sorrow forher distress, wished it a happier conclusion than there was at presentreason to hope, and leaving his compliments for her relations, with onlyone serious, parting look, went away.As he quitted the room, Elizabeth felt how improbable it was that theyshould ever see each other again on such terms of cordiality ashad marked their several meetings in Derbyshire; and as she threw aretrospective glance over the whole of their acquaintance, so fullof contradictions and varieties, sighed at the perverseness of thosefeelings which would now have promoted its continuance, and wouldformerly have rejoiced in its termination.If gratitude and esteem are good foundations of affection, Elizabeth’schange of sentiment will be neither improbable nor faulty. But ifotherwise--if regard springing from such sources is unreasonable orunnatural, in comparison of what is so often described as arising ona first interview with its object, and even before two words have beenexchanged, nothing can be said in her defence, except that she had givensomewhat of a trial to the latter method in her partiality for Wickham,and that its ill success might, perhaps, authorise her to seek the otherless interesting mode of attachment. Be that as it may, she saw himgo with regret; and in this early example of what Lydia’s infamy mustproduce, found additional anguish as she reflected on that wretchedbusiness. Never, since reading Jane’s second letter, had she entertaineda hope of Wickham’s meaning to marry her. No one but Jane, she thought,could flatter herself with such an expectation. Surprise was the leastof her feelings on this development. While the contents of the firstletter remained in her mind, she was all surprise--all astonishment thatWickham should marry a girl whom it was impossible he could marryfor money; and how Lydia could ever have attached him had appearedincomprehensible. But now it was all too natural. For such an attachmentas this she might have sufficient charms; and though she did not supposeLydia to be deliberately engaging in an elopement without the intentionof marriage, she had no difficulty in believing that neither her virtuenor her understanding would preserve her from falling an easy prey.She had never perceived, while the regiment was in Hertfordshire, thatLydia had any partiality for him; but she was convinced that Lydiawanted only encouragement to attach herself to anybody. Sometimes oneofficer, sometimes another, had been her favourite, as their attentionsraised them in her opinion. Her affections had continually beenfluctuating but never without an object. The mischief of neglect andmistaken indulgence towards such a girl--oh! how acutely did she nowfeel it!She was wild to be at home--to hear, to see, to be upon the spot toshare with Jane in the cares that must now fall wholly upon her, in afamily so deranged, a father absent, a mother incapable of exertion, andrequiring constant attendance; and though almost persuaded that nothingcould be done for Lydia, her uncle’s interference seemed of the utmostimportance, and till he entered the room her impatience was severe. Mr.and Mrs. Gardiner had hurried back in alarm, supposing by the servant’saccount that their niece was taken suddenly ill; but satisfying theminstantly on that head, she eagerly communicated the cause of theirsummons, reading the two letters aloud, and dwelling on the postscriptof the last with trembling energy.--Though Lydia had never been afavourite with them, Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner could not but be deeplyafflicted. Not Lydia only, but all were concerned in it; and after thefirst exclamations of surprise and horror, Mr. Gardiner promised everyassistance in his power. Elizabeth, though expecting no less, thankedhim with tears of gratitude; and all three being actuated by one spirit,everything relating to their journey was speedily settled. They were tobe off as soon as possible. “But what is to be done about Pemberley?” cried Mrs. Gardiner. “John told us Mr. Darcy was here when you sent forus; was it so?”“Yes; and I told him we should not be able to keep our engagement._That_ is all settled.”“What is all settled?” repeated the other, as she ran into her room toprepare. “And are they upon such terms as for her to disclose the realtruth? Oh, that I knew how it was!”But wishes were vain, or at least could only serve to amuse her in thehurry and confusion of the following hour. Had Elizabeth been at leisureto be idle, she would have remained certain that all employment wasimpossible to one so wretched as herself; but she had her share ofbusiness as well as her aunt, and amongst the rest there were notes tobe written to all their friends at Lambton, with false excuses for theirsudden departure. An hour, however, saw the whole completed; and Mr.Gardiner meanwhile having settled his account at the inn, nothingremained to be done but to go; and Elizabeth, after all the misery ofthe morning, found herself, in a shorter space of time than she couldhave supposed, seated in the carriage, and on the road to Longbourn.Chapter 47“I have been thinking it over again, Elizabeth,” said her uncle, as theydrove from the town; “and really, upon serious consideration, I am muchmore inclined than I was to judge as your eldest sister does on thematter. It appears to me so very unlikely that any young man shouldform such a design against a girl who is by no means unprotected orfriendless, and who was actually staying in his colonel’s family, that Iam strongly inclined to hope the best. Could he expect that her friendswould not step forward? Could he expect to be noticed again by theregiment, after such an affront to Colonel Forster? His temptation isnot adequate to the risk!”“Do you really think so?” cried Elizabeth, brightening up for a moment.“Upon my word,” said Mrs. Gardiner, “I begin to be of your uncle’sopinion. It is really too great a violation of decency, honour, andinterest, for him to be guilty of. I cannot think so very ill ofWickham. Can you yourself, Lizzy, so wholly give him up, as to believehim capable of it?”“Not, perhaps, of neglecting his own interest; but of every otherneglect I can believe him capable. If, indeed, it should be so! But Idare not hope it. Why should they not go on to Scotland if that had beenthe case?”“In the first place,” replied Mr. Gardiner, “there is no absolute proofthat they are not gone to Scotland.”“Oh! but their removing from the chaise into a hackney coach is sucha presumption! And, besides, no traces of them were to be found on theBarnet road.”“Well, then--supposing them to be in London. They may be there, thoughfor the purpose of concealment, for no more exceptional purpose. It isnot likely that money should be very abundant on either side; and itmight strike them that they could be more economically, though lessexpeditiously, married in London than in Scotland.”“But why all this secrecy? Why any fear of detection? Why must theirmarriage be private? Oh, no, no--this is not likely. His most particularfriend, you see by Jane’s account, was persuaded of his never intendingto marry her. Wickham will never marry a woman without some money. Hecannot afford it. And what claims has Lydia--what attraction has shebeyond youth, health, and good humour that could make him, for her sake,forego every chance of benefiting himself by marrying well? As to whatrestraint the apprehensions of disgrace in the corps might throw on adishonourable elopement with her, I am not able to judge; for I knownothing of the effects that such a step might produce. But as to yourother objection, I am afraid it will hardly hold good. Lydia hasno brothers to step forward; and he might imagine, from my father’sbehaviour, from his indolence and the little attention he has everseemed to give to what was going forward in his family, that _he_ woulddo as little, and think as little about it, as any father could do, insuch a matter.”“But can you think that Lydia is so lost to everything but love of himas to consent to live with him on any terms other than marriage?”“It does seem, and it is most shocking indeed,” replied Elizabeth, withtears in her eyes, “that a sister’s sense of decency and virtue in sucha point should admit of doubt. But, really, I know not what to say.Perhaps I am not doing her justice. But she is very young; she has neverbeen taught to think on serious subjects; and for the last half-year,nay, for a twelvemonth--she has been given up to nothing but amusementand vanity. She has been allowed to dispose of her time in the most idleand frivolous manner, and to adopt any opinions that came in her way.Since the ----shire were first quartered in Meryton, nothing but love,flirtation, and officers have been in her head. She has been doingeverything in her power by thinking and talking on the subject, to givegreater--what shall I call it? susceptibility to her feelings; which arenaturally lively enough. And we all know that Wickham has every charm ofperson and address that can captivate a woman.”“But you see that Jane,” said her aunt, “does not think so very ill ofWickham as to believe him capable of the attempt.”“Of whom does Jane ever think ill? And who is there, whatever might betheir former conduct, that she would think capable of such an attempt,till it were proved against them? But Jane knows, as well as I do, whatWickham really is. We both know that he has been profligate in everysense of the word; that he has neither integrity nor honour; that he isas false and deceitful as he is insinuating.”“And do you really know all this?” cried Mrs. Gardiner, whose curiosityas to the mode of her intelligence was all alive.“I do indeed,” replied Elizabeth, colouring. “I told you, the other day,of his infamous behaviour to Mr. Darcy; and you yourself, when last atLongbourn, heard in what manner he spoke of the man who had behavedwith such forbearance and liberality towards him. And there are othercircumstances which I am not at liberty--which it is not worth while torelate; but his lies about the whole Pemberley family are endless. Fromwhat he said of Miss Darcy I was thoroughly prepared to see a proud,reserved, disagreeable girl. Yet he knew to the contrary himself. Hemust know that she was as amiable and unpretending as we have foundher.”“But does Lydia know nothing of this? can she be ignorant of what youand Jane seem so well to understand?”“Oh, yes!--that, that is the worst of all. Till I was in Kent, and sawso much both of Mr. Darcy and his relation Colonel Fitzwilliam, I wasignorant of the truth myself. And when I returned home, the ----shirewas to leave Meryton in a week or fortnight’s time. As that was thecase, neither Jane, to whom I related the whole, nor I, thought itnecessary to make our knowledge public; for of what use couldit apparently be to any one, that the good opinion which all theneighbourhood had of him should then be overthrown? And even when it wassettled that Lydia should go with Mrs. Forster, the necessity of openingher eyes to his character never occurred to me. That _she_ could bein any danger from the deception never entered my head. That such aconsequence as _this_ could ensue, you may easily believe, was farenough from my thoughts.”“When they all removed to Brighton, therefore, you had no reason, Isuppose, to believe them fond of each other?”“Not the slightest. I can remember no symptom of affection on eitherside; and had anything of the kind been perceptible, you must be awarethat ours is not a family on which it could be thrown away. When firsthe entered the corps, she was ready enough to admire him; but so we allwere. Every girl in or near Meryton was out of her senses about him forthe first two months; but he never distinguished _her_ by any particularattention; and, consequently, after a moderate period of extravagant andwild admiration, her fancy for him gave way, and others of the regiment,who treated her with more distinction, again became her favourites.”                          * * * * *It may be easily believed, that however little of novelty could be addedto their fears, hopes, and conjectures, on this interesting subject, byits repeated discussion, no other could detain them from it long, duringthe whole of the journey. From Elizabeth’s thoughts it was never absent.Fixed there by the keenest of all anguish, self-reproach, she could findno interval of ease or forgetfulness.They travelled as expeditiously as possible, and, sleeping one nighton the road, reached Longbourn by dinner time the next day. It was acomfort to Elizabeth to consider that Jane could not have been weariedby long expectations.The little Gardiners, attracted by the sight of a chaise, were standingon the steps of the house as they entered the paddock; and, when thecarriage drove up to the door, the joyful surprise that lighted up theirfaces, and displayed itself over their whole bodies, in a variety ofcapers and frisks, was the first pleasing earnest of their welcome.Elizabeth jumped out; and, after giving each of them a hasty kiss,hurried into the vestibule, where Jane, who came running down from hermother’s apartment, immediately met her.Elizabeth, as she affectionately embraced her, whilst tears filled theeyes of both, lost not a moment in asking whether anything had beenheard of the fugitives.“Not yet,” replied Jane. “But now that my dear uncle is come, I hopeeverything will be well.”“Is my father in town?”“Yes, he went on Tuesday, as I wrote you word.”“And have you heard from him often?”“We have heard only twice. He wrote me a few lines on Wednesday to saythat he had arrived in safety, and to give me his directions, which Iparticularly begged him to do. He merely added that he should not writeagain till he had something of importance to mention.”“And my mother--how is she? How are you all?”“My mother is tolerably well, I trust; though her spirits are greatlyshaken. She is up stairs and will have great satisfaction in seeing youall. She does not yet leave her dressing-room. Mary and Kitty, thankHeaven, are quite well.”“But you--how are you?” cried Elizabeth. “You look pale. How much youmust have gone through!”Her sister, however, assured her of her being perfectly well; and theirconversation, which had been passing while Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner wereengaged with their children, was now put an end to by the approachof the whole party. Jane ran to her uncle and aunt, and welcomed andthanked them both, with alternate smiles and tears.When they were all in the drawing-room, the questions which Elizabethhad already asked were of course repeated by the others, and they soonfound that Jane had no intelligence to give. The sanguine hope ofgood, however, which the benevolence of her heart suggested had not yetdeserted her; she still expected that it would all end well, and thatevery morning would bring some letter, either from Lydia or her father,to explain their proceedings, and, perhaps, announce their marriage.Mrs. Bennet, to whose apartment they all repaired, after a few minutes’conversation together, received them exactly as might be expected; withtears and lamentations of regret, invectives against the villainousconduct of Wickham, and complaints of her own sufferings and ill-usage;blaming everybody but the person to whose ill-judging indulgence theerrors of her daughter must principally be owing.“If I had been able,” said she, “to carry my point in going to Brighton,with all my family, _this_ would not have happened; but poor dear Lydiahad nobody to take care of her. Why did the Forsters ever let her go outof their sight? I am sure there was some great neglect or other on theirside, for she is not the kind of girl to do such a thing if she had beenwell looked after. I always thought they were very unfit to have thecharge of her; but I was overruled, as I always am. Poor dear child!And now here’s Mr. Bennet gone away, and I know he will fight Wickham,wherever he meets him and then he will be killed, and what is to becomeof us all? The Collinses will turn us out before he is cold in hisgrave, and if you are not kind to us, brother, I do not know what weshall do.”They all exclaimed against such terrific ideas; and Mr. Gardiner, aftergeneral assurances of his affection for her and all her family, told herthat he meant to be in London the very next day, and would assist Mr.Bennet in every endeavour for recovering Lydia.“Do not give way to useless alarm,” added he; “though it is right to beprepared for the worst, there is no occasion to look on it as certain.It is not quite a week since they left Brighton. In a few days more wemay gain some news of them; and till we know that they are not married,and have no design of marrying, do not let us give the matter over aslost. As soon as I get to town I shall go to my brother, and makehim come home with me to Gracechurch Street; and then we may consulttogether as to what is to be done.”“Oh! my dear brother,” replied Mrs. Bennet, “that is exactly what Icould most wish for. And now do, when you get to town, find them out,wherever they may be; and if they are not married already, _make_ themmarry. And as for wedding clothes, do not let them wait for that, buttell Lydia she shall have as much money as she chooses to buy them,after they are married. And, above all, keep Mr. Bennet from fighting.Tell him what a dreadful state I am in, that I am frighted out of mywits--and have such tremblings, such flutterings, all over me--suchspasms in my side and pains in my head, and such beatings at heart, thatI can get no rest by night nor by day. And tell my dear Lydia not togive any directions about her clothes till she has seen me, for she doesnot know which are the best warehouses. Oh, brother, how kind you are! Iknow you will contrive it all.”But Mr. Gardiner, though he assured her again of his earnest endeavoursin the cause, could not avoid recommending moderation to her, as wellin her hopes as her fear; and after talking with her in this manner tilldinner was on the table, they all left her to vent all her feelings onthe housekeeper, who attended in the absence of her daughters.Though her brother and sister were persuaded that there was no realoccasion for such a seclusion from the family, they did not attempt tooppose it, for they knew that she had not prudence enough to hold hertongue before the servants, while they waited at table, and judged itbetter that _one_ only of the household, and the one whom they couldmost trust should comprehend all her fears and solicitude on thesubject.In the dining-room they were soon joined by Mary and Kitty, who had beentoo busily engaged in their separate apartments to make their appearancebefore. One came from her books, and the other from her toilette. Thefaces of both, however, were tolerably calm; and no change was visiblein either, except that the loss of her favourite sister, or the angerwhich she had herself incurred in this business, had given more offretfulness than usual to the accents of Kitty. As for Mary, she wasmistress enough of herself to whisper to Elizabeth, with a countenanceof grave reflection, soon after they were seated at table:“This is a most unfortunate affair, and will probably be much talked of.But we must stem the tide of malice, and pour into the wounded bosoms ofeach other the balm of sisterly consolation.”Then, perceiving in Elizabeth no inclination of replying, she added,“Unhappy as the event must be for Lydia, we may draw from it this usefullesson: that loss of virtue in a female is irretrievable; that onefalse step involves her in endless ruin; that her reputation is no lessbrittle than it is beautiful; and that she cannot be too much guarded inher behaviour towards the undeserving of the other sex.”Elizabeth lifted up her eyes in amazement, but was too much oppressedto make any reply. Mary, however, continued to console herself with suchkind of moral extractions from the evil before them.In the afternoon, the two elder Miss Bennets were able to be forhalf-an-hour by themselves; and Elizabeth instantly availed herself ofthe opportunity of making any inquiries, which Jane was equally eager tosatisfy. After joining in general lamentations over the dreadful sequelof this event, which Elizabeth considered as all but certain, and MissBennet could not assert to be wholly impossible, the former continuedthe subject, by saying, “But tell me all and everything about it whichI have not already heard. Give me further particulars. What did ColonelForster say? Had they no apprehension of anything before the elopementtook place? They must have seen them together for ever.”“Colonel Forster did own that he had often suspected some partiality,especially on Lydia’s side, but nothing to give him any alarm. I am sogrieved for him! His behaviour was attentive and kind to the utmost. He_was_ coming to us, in order to assure us of his concern, before he hadany idea of their not being gone to Scotland: when that apprehensionfirst got abroad, it hastened his